Growing weed indoors is great because you can grow it any time of year and you’ll have complete control over the plant and what you put into it. Live in an apartment or a small house? Don’t worry, you can grow weed practically anywhere, even if you don’t have a backyard or a lot of extra space.

Benefits of growing weed indoors
High-quality weed
Although it’s more resource-intensive than growing outdoors and you will likely have to spend more money on utilities to power equipment, you can control every aspect of your grow environment and what you put in your plant, allowing you to dial in your setup to grow some primo weed.

Adaptability
Unlike outdoor growing, you aren’t tied to the sun and the seasons. You will be providing the entire environment the plants need to grow, including the grow medium—soil, rockwool, etc.—and regulating the amount of water and nutrients they receive, as well as controlling temperature, humidity, and more for them. 

Multiple harvests
You can let your plants get as big as you want, and can control when they flower and when you harvest, and you can start another batch right away or whenever you want. You can grow any time of year, even straight through winter or summer, and you’ll get consistent crops each time.

Privacy and security
Even in legal states, you may want to conceal your crop from judgmental neighbors and definitely from potential thieves. Growing indoors allows you to grow discreetly behind a locked door.

How to set up an indoor grow room
indoor marijuana grow
Below is a list of things to consider and equipment you will need to purchase to get started growing marijuana indoors.

Indoor space
You’ll need a dedicated space for your marijuana plants—you won’t be able to move them around. Ideally, the space is next to a window so you can vent air from the grow space outside. Growing weed plants smell! Especially when flowering kicks in, you’ll want to redirect air so your house doesn’t reek of weed. 

A lot of people these days buy grow tents for their weed, but they aren’t necessary. You can grow in a closet, tent, cabinet, spare room, or a corner in an unfinished basement. Just keep in mind that you’ll need to tailor your equipment (and plants) to fit the space.

It’s a good idea to start small—the smaller the grow, the less expensive it is to set up. Newbie mistakes will be less costly if you only have a handful of plants. Additionally, most state laws only allow for growing six plants, but some allow up to 12. 

When designing your space, you’ll need to take into account room for your plants, as well as space for lights, fans, ducting, and other equipment. You’ll also need space to work on the plants. Cannabis plants can double in size in the early stages of flowering, so make sure you have adequate head space!

Every space is different and there will be a learning curve to growing in yours.

Indoor climate
Cannabis, like all plants, prefers certain environmental conditions in order to thrive. Temperature, humidity, light intensity, and airflow are all factors that will need to be monitored and regulated in order to keep cannabis healthy through its different phases.

Although you’ll be controlling the climate inside the grow space, climate outside the grow space will affect your plants. If the environment outside your grow space is very warm or humid, you’ll have issues controlling your grow space. Choose a cool, dry area with ready access to fresh air from outside.

If you’re growing in a cold, wet basement, you might have to run a dehumidifier or heater to stabilize the environment. Conversely, if your space is too hot, you might need to add extra fans or an AC to cool the plants down. 

One trick to avoid hot temps is to have the grow lights on during the evening, when it’s cooler outside, and leave the lights off during the day when it’s hot. This may help bring down the temps, but you’ll only be able to work on the plants at nighttime when the lights are on.

Lights
Weed plants need different amounts of light during their vegetative and flowering stages. You don’t have to worry about this in an outdoor setting—the sun and the season dictate this—but when growing indoors, you will be controlling it. 

Plants need 18 hours of light a day when in the vegetative stage and 12 hours a day when flowering. The reduction in light from 18 to 12 hours a day is what triggers the flowering cycle—when weed plants start to grow buds.     

Because the amount of light a plant receives is so important, you’ll need to make your indoor grow space light-tight. Light leaks during dark periods will confuse your plants and can cause them to produce male flowers or revert to a different stage.

Different lights produce different colors of light. Here’s a brief rundown of the most popular types of cannabis grow lights used for indoor growing.

HID 

HID (high-intensity discharge) lights are the industry standard, widely used for their combination of output, efficiency, and value. They cost a bit more than incandescent or fluorescent fixtures, but produce far more light per unit of electricity used. Conversely, they are not as efficient as LED lighting, but they cost much less.

The two main types of HID lamp used for growing are:

Metal halide (MH) produces light that is blueish-white and is generally used during vegetative growth.
High pressure sodium (HPS) produces light that is more on the red-orange end of the spectrum and is used during the flowering stage.
In addition to bulbs, HID lighting setups require a ballast and hood/reflector for each light. Some ballasts are designed for use with either MH or HPS lamps, while many newer designs will run both.

If you can’t afford both MH and HPS bulbs, start with HPS as they deliver more light per watt. Magnetic ballasts are cheaper than digital ballasts, but run hotter, are less efficient, and harder on your bulbs. Digital ballasts are generally a better option, but are more expensive. Beware of cheap digital ballasts, as they are often not well shielded and can create electromagnetic interference that will affect radio and WiFi signals.

Unless you’re growing in a large, open space with a lot of ventilation, you’ll need air-cooled reflector hoods to mount your lamps in, as HID bulbs produce a lot of heat. This requires ducting and exhaust fans, which will increase your initial cost but make controlling temperature in your grow room much easier.

Fluorescent grow lights
grow lights
Juanmonino/iStock
Fluorescent light fixtures, particularly those using high-output T5 bulbs, are quite popular with small-scale cannabis growers because:

They tend to be cheaper to set up, as reflector, ballast, and bulbs are included in a single package.
They don’t require a cooling system since they don’t generate nearly the amount of heat that HID setups do.
The main drawback is fluorescent lights are less efficient, generating about 20-30% less light per watt of electricity used; space is another concern, as it would require approximately 19 four-foot long T5 bulbs to equal the output of a single 600 watt HPS bulb.

LED grow lights
Light emitting diode (LED) technology has been around for a while, and they are getting more efficient all the time. The main drawback to LED grow lights is their cost: well-designed fixtures can cost 10 times what a comparable HID setup would. 

But the benefits are great: LEDs last much longer, use far less electricity, create less heat, and the best designs generate a fuller spectrum of light, which can get bigger yields and better quality.

Check out our buying guide on indoor lights for more info.

Air circulation

Elysse Feigenblatt/Leafly
Plants need fresh air to thrive and carbon dioxide (CO2) is essential to the process of photosynthesis. This means you will need a steady stream of air flowing through your grow room, which will allow you to move hot air out of the space and bring cool air in. 

This is easily achieved by placing an exhaust fan near the top of the space to suck out warm air—warm air rises—and adding a port or passive fan on the opposite side of the space near the floor to bring in cool air. A complete air exchange throughout the entire grow space should occur once every minute or so.

Without proper airflow, a grow space can experience rapid changes in humidity or develop pockets of CO2 depletion, neither of which are good for plant growth. CO2 depletion can lead to nutrient lockout, and areas of high humidity are prone to pest infestation, mold, or mildew.

It’s also a good idea to have oscillating fans to provide a constant breeze in your grow room as it will strengthen your plants’ stems, making them stronger and healthier. 

Setting up fans
For small spaces or tents, clip-on fans can be attached to structures like walls, corners, or support beams. For larger grow rooms, use medium-sized oscillating fans or big floor models.

Fans should be positioned to provide direct, even airflow throughout the garden. This typically involves using multiple fans that work together or fans that have oscillation capabilities.

There should be a comfortable airflow both above and below the canopy, and fans shouldn’t blow air directly onto plants—this can cause wind burn, which makes leaves recede into a claw-like deformation.

Dehumidifiers and ACs
If your space is too humid, you may need to invest in a dehumidifier—also known as “dehueys.” However, keep in mind that while dehueys will reduce humidity, they typically increase temperature—you may need more fans or an AC when adding a dehumidifier. 

Getting the right climate for your plants can be a delicate balance involving multiple pieces of equipment and also lots of electricity. This is part of what makes growing weed indoors more expensive than growing outdoors.

Fans are a must in a grow space to move air around, so buy some of those before an AC unit. If you find that fans aren’t bringing down the temperature enough, then you may want to invest in an AC.

Timers/Automation
You will definitely want to invest in a timer for your lights. Because the amount of light a plant receives dictates its vegetative or flowering stage, it’s important to give it a consistent amount of light every day, and that’s done with a timer. It’s a good idea to check your timer at least once a week to make sure it’s working properly.

You can also use a timer for your fans, but a thermostat is better—you can set it to a specific temperature, and the fans will turn on when it’s too hot and turn off when it’s too cold.

Most dehumidifiers and ACs have built-in thermostats, but if they don’t, you’ll want to buy an external one. 

For growers who have a little extra money to spend and want full control over their indoor garden, environmental controllers will allow you to automate the process. These devices are essential for if you’re away from the garden for a long period of time. 

You can connect a controller to fans, dehumidifiers, humidifiers, heaters, or air conditioners, and set thresholds whereby each device will power on and off based on your ideal environmental settings. Some units run autonomously, making changes based on set parameters, while others allow you to control each element via an app on a phone, tablet, or computer. 

Regulating temperature and humidity in your indoor grow space
home growing cannabis humidity, indoor growing marijuana regulating environment
(hanohiki/Adobe Stock)
You’ll need to ensure that temperatures remain within a comfortable range for your plants, between 70-85°F when lights are on and between 58-70°F when off. Some varieties of cannabis—generally indicas—prefer the colder side of the range, while others—typically sativas—are more tolerant of high temperatures.

For the most part, weed prefers these temps at each growth stage for optimal health:

Seedlings/clones: 75-85°F; ~70% relative humidity
Vegetative growth: 70-85°F; 40-60% relative humidity
Flowering: 65-80°F; 40-50% relative humidity
The two factors you need to control to dial in the environment are temperature and humidity. 

Inevitably, there will be fluctuations of temperature and humidity in your cannabis garden. These fluctuations can occur both throughout a grow space as well as within pockets inside a given room. They can also occur at different points within a given day or throughout a season as conditions change in the environment outside your grow space.

It can be tricky getting the right balance of temperature and humidity because they affect each other—turning up your dehumidifier will lower the humidity of your grow space, but it will also increase the temperature of the area. This in turn may require you to turn on an AC unit—everything’s connected! 

Tools to measure temperature and humidity
Equip yourself with these cheap and easy-to-use tools to take measurements in your indoor cannabis setup:

Thermometer: A basic one will allow you to measure how warm or cool the environment is inside your garden.
Hygrometer: This measures humidity, or more specifically, water vapor content in the air.
Infrared thermometer, or IR thermometer (optional): IR thermometers use a detection device called a thermopile to measure surface temperatures. Although not necessary, these are helpful in finding out leaf temperatures, which will give you an extra layer of knowledge on how to properly regulate environmental conditions.
Regulating temperature
Controlling temperature in your indoor grow room or cannabis garden can be achieved by manipulating these factors: 

Lights: Different grow lights will give off different heat signatures. Hot lights such MH, HPS, and fluorescents produce much more heat than LEDs. Also, lights can be raised or lowered to change temperature at the canopy level.
Airflow: You can remove warm air (up high) out of the garden and bring in fresh cool air (down low) with fans and ducting. Fans can also help exchange air throughout your canopy, cooling leaves in the process. 
ACs: You may need to bring in an air conditioner to rapidly cool the overall temperature of your grow space if it’s too hot and fans aren’t enough.
Heaters: Some gardens may require warm air, especially during times when lights are off and not generating heat. 
Regulating Humidity
Humidity is the amount of water vapor in the air. Here are some ways to control it in your marijuana grow room:

Dehumidifiers: Dehueys remove moisture from the air but also increase temperature.
Airflow: As with regulating temperature, regulating airflow will allow you to move moisture in and out of your grow space and control humidity—simply opening up a space, i.e., opening the door to your grow room or tent, can bring down humidity.
Humidifiers: A humidifier can add water vapor to a grow space and increases moisture levels if it’s too dry.
Water: In the absence of a humidifier, you can mist plants with a spray bottle to create extra moisture. 
Soil and other media for growing weed indoors

(pingpao/AdobeStock)
There are many different media to choose from, including good ol’ fashioned pots full of soil, rockwool cubes, a hydroponic tray, and more. 

Soil is the most traditional medium for growing marijuana indoors, as well as the most forgiving, making it a good choice for first-time growers. Any high-quality potting soil will work, as long as it doesn’t contain artificial extended release fertilizer—like Miracle Gro—which is unsuitable for growing good cannabis.

Good soil for cannabis relies on a healthy population of mycorrhizae and soil bacteria to facilitate the conversion of organic matter into nutrients that a plant can use. Alternately, you can use a regular soil mix and then supplement your plants with liquid nutrients.

Finding the right soil for cannabis
For most first-time gardeners, we recommend buying a quality potting soil that will provide your plants with enough nutrients to get them through most of their growth cycle without having to add many amendments or liquid nutrients. This pre-fertilized soil—often referred to as “super-soil”—that can grow cannabis plants from start to finish without any added nutrients if used correctly. 

You can make this yourself by combining worm castings, bat guano, and other components with a good soil and letting it sit for a few weeks, or it can be purchased pre-made from a local nursery or grow shop.

While shopping for soil, you might be overwhelmed by the options available at your local garden store. The soil type is the basic structure of your soil. From there, look at nutrients, microorganisms, and other amendments that improve the soil. Your choices will be flooded with words like:

Perlite
Worm castings
Bat guano
Biochar
Peat moss
Compost
Fish meal
Bone meal
Glacier rock dust
Plant food
These are just some examples of amendments commonly used in different types of soils. Heavily amended soils will have long lists that break down all organic nutrients they contain. Some companies create soils that offer a great structure with base nutrients, but allow you to fill in the gaps as you desire.

Growing containers
What type of container you use will depend on the grow medium, the system, and the size of your plants. 

Inexpensive options include standard plastic pots or cloth bags, while some growers choose to spend more on “smart pots” or “air pots”—containers designed to enhance airflow to the plant’s root zone. 

What size pot do I need?
Many growers will start plants in a one-gallon pot and then transplant up to a bigger pot as plants get bigger. A lot of growers will transplant once, from a one-gallon to a five-gallon pot, and harvest from there. If your plants get bigger, they may need a seven- or ten-gallon pot.

What to look for in a pot
Your cannabis wants a safe, healthy place for root development. Without healthy roots, your cannabis will never thrive. Roots are in charge of water retention, nutrient absorption, anchoring the plant, and they also facilitate vegetative growth. 

Drainage is key, as cannabis plants can get waterlogged and develop root rot. If you repurpose containers, be sure they have holes in the bottoms and set them in trays.

For a root system to develop and thrive, they will need the following:

Drainage: Water retention is paramount for healthy plants—without it, your cannabis will wither and die. But too much water will waterlog your plant and lead to root rot, killing roots.
Oxygen: Plant roots require oxygen to function properly. Choose a container that facilitates enough oxygen for root development without overexposing them to the elements—containers do this though various styles of perforation.
Nutrients: Roots require optimal conditions for nutrient absorption to occur. This includes pH balance, optimal temperatures, and nutrient availability.
Space: Roots need plenty of space to branch out. A container that is too small will cause it to become rootbound and choke the plant.
Traditional plastic containers 
plastic pot containers
(Turnervisual/iStock)
Standard plastic containers are a popular option for growers operating on a budget. These pots are inexpensive and provide the essentials for your plants.

Pros: 

Low overhead costs
Solid drainage (plus it’s easy to add more holes)
Transplanting is easy and inexpensive
Cons: 

Can’t protect root systems from temperature fluctuations as well
Lack of durability which can cause cracks and structural damage over time
May have airflow issues depending on the grow medium
Fabric containers
fabric pots
(Juanmonino/iStock)
These are quickly becoming the standard. Roots in fabric pots grow to the outer edges and attempt to bypass the porous fabric wall but are cut back, allowing new growth to occur. This process, called “air pruning,” results in a denser root composition which promotes healthy growth and development.

Pros:

Promotes dense, healthy root systems
Increased airflow to roots
Excellent drainage
Cons:

Require more attention and maintenance because they dry out quickly. Note: You can use larger pots to help slow drying.
Flimsy structure can make plant support challenging
Ceramic pots
ceramic pots
(sanddebeautheil/iStock)
Terra cotta pots offer a unique set of benefits to growers in hot climates.

Pros:

Absorb moisture and retain lower temperatures during hot days
Heavy weight helps to anchor larger plants
Cons:

Less than optimal drainage; drilling holes into clay pots is possible but requires special tools and is labor-intensive
Heavy weight makes it difficult to transport plants
Caring for your indoor cannabis plants
When starting with clones or seedlings, you’ll want to check your plants every day because they’re delicate and sensitive to environmental conditions. You may need to adjust temperature and humidity levels in your indoor grow space at first to hit the sweet spot for your plants.

As your indoor weed plants grow, they’ll need less attention, but you’ll still need to check up on them every 2-3 days.

Watering and nutrients
When growing weed indoors, you’ll likely have to add nutrients to your plants. You won’t need to add nutrients every time you water, but get on a schedule where you water every other time, or two on, one off.

Before watering, check the pH of your water and add pH Up or Down if needed.

If using nutrients, estimate how much water you’ll need for all of your weed plants so you can measure out and mix in the appropriate amount of nutrients.

Remember, a common mistake newbie growers make is to overwater plants.

Check out our Guide on nutrients for more info.

Check for pests, mold, or nutrient deficiencies
You’ll also want to take this time to check over your weed plants for pests, mold, or nutrient deficiencies.

Examine the tops and undersides of leaves for pests or discoloration—spider mites live on the underside of leaves—as well as stalks and branches. Also, check the soil for pests.

Equipment
Make sure all equipment is on, no breakers have flipped, and everything is running smoothly. Check lights, timers, fans, dehueys, ACs, and anything else that plugs into the wall or has a battery.

Think of all the equipment in your grow space as organs in the body—if one fails, the others will have to work a lot harder for a bit, and then will fail in a matter of time.

Daily maintenance checklist for your indoor marijuana grow
Water plants
Check pH of water
Measure and mix nutrients
Check plants and soil for pests, mold, nutrient deficiencies
Prune/remove dead leaves on plants if needed
Determine if plants need topping
Make sure plants are spaced properly and not shading each other out
Adjust level of lights if leaf tips are getting burned
Check temperature and humidity in grow space
Check equipment is running properly, i.e., lights, timers, fans, dehueys, etc.
Indoor marijuana grow timeline
The growth stages of marijuana can be broken down into four primary stages from seed to harvest:

Germination (3-10 days)
Seedling (2-3 weeks)
Vegetative (3-16 weeks)
Flowering (8-11 weeks)
Generally speaking, it takes anywhere from 10-32 weeks, or about 3-8 months, to smoke what you’ve grown. (It’ll be quicker if you start with a clone or an autoflower seed.) 

That’s a big variance, but it really depends on how big you want your plants and how often you want to harvest—you can have multiple harvests of smaller plants, or less harvests of bigger plants.

For example, it takes less time to grow 3′ weed plants than 5′ plants; in the span of a year, you can maybe grow four harvests of 3′ plants, or two harvests of 5′ plants.

You’ll likely yield about the same amount of weed in both cases, but more harvests mean you’ll have fresh weed to smoke more often and have more opportunities to grow different strains. But more harvests also means more work in cleaning up the space between harvests, trimming, etc.

The biggest variability in how long a marijuana plant takes to grow will happen in the vegetative stage—after the seedling phase and before flower. 

The flowering stage will always take about eight weeks—some strains take seven, some nine, some even more, it depends on the strain.

So when growing weed indoors, you can control the size of your plants by flipping them into flower whenever you think they’re big enough in the vegetative stage.

Check out our Guide on marijuana plant growth stages for more info.

Odor control in your indoor marijuana grow
As much fun as growing marijuana indoors is, having a home that perpetually smells like fresh weed can be a serious inconvenience, if not to you than possibly your neighbors. Although weed odor from a small indoor grow in a closet is much easier to manage than a large grow with several flowering plants, both can produce pesky odors that will permeate an entire home if left unattended.

Plants in the vegetative stage maintain a low odor as they haven’t begun to produce terpenes, the plant’s aromatic compounds. As weed plants transition into the flowering phase, trichomes will start to develop and produce terpenes, causing them to smell more.

Here are some ways to mitigate odor when growing weed indoors. 

Check temperature and humidity levels
The first step in odor control is making sure temperature and humidity are under control in your grow space—high temperature and humidity will perpetuate odors.

As your plants get bigger and especially when they start flowering, they’ll start to smell more. Outfitting your grow with a dehuey or AC can help bring odor down.

Make sure air is circulating through your garden
Proper air circulation will help maintain temperature and humidity, and also bring down odor. Ideally, air needs to move through a garden every few minutes, and you should create a vent to the outside. Oscillating fans, and intake and exhaust fans can move air through your garden quickly, taking odors out with them.

Odor absorbing gels may help
Odor becomes much more difficult to manage in the final six weeks of a marijuana plant’s life, when trichomes and terpene production ramps up. You can also get odor-absorbing gels, which replace weed smells with other scents. Keep in mind that odor gels don’t eliminate odors, but simply mask them. 

Activated carbon filters
These come in different shapes and sizes and are a great way to get rid of odor in an indoor weed grow. Also known as “carbon scrubbers” for their ability to get contaminants out of the air, these employ activated and highly ionized carbon to attract particulates responsible for carrying odor, such as dust, hair, mold spores, and volatile organic compounds, and traps them in a filter.

Carbon filters usually work best when positioned at the highest point in your grow space, where the most heat accumulates.

Intro to Growing Cannabis: Learn How to Grow Weed!
You’re here because you want to learn how to grow weed indoors and are interested in a free “online class” about growing marijuana. Despite what you may have heard, growing your own cannabis is actually pretty easy once you have the right information. Anyone with the will to grow, a few extra minutes each day, and a grow space already have what it takes to grow their own cannabis.

What Supplies Do I Need to Start Growing Weed Indoors?

Cannabis goes by many names; weed, pot, marijuana, bud, ganja, and more. These all refer to the dried and cured buds of a female cannabis plant. Cannabis plants can live in many environments, and some form of cannabis naturally grows nearly everywhere in the world. Yet it’s the flowers of specially bred female cannabis plants which most people think of when it comes to the word “cannabis.”

I Want a Shorter and More Simple Guide to Growing Cannabis (this one is comprehensive)

The flowers of potent strains of cannabis are grown, harvested, dried and cured to become the buds that can be used to vaporize, smoke, eat (via edibles) or otherwise processed for recreational or medical marijuana purposes.

Dried & Cured Flowers of a Female Cannabis Plant

Cannabis bud assortment in hand - a variety of different strains as a result of indoor home growing!
“Sinsemilla” – potent cannabis buds without seeds

Maybe you’re like me a few years ago. You like cannabis, or need it for medical reasons, and you’re tired of paying for it. Or perhaps, like me, you couldn’t even find any cannabis to buy most of the time.

For people like us, growing cannabis can be a relaxing pastime that can save you a lot of money, time and frustration.

How to Grow Your Own Marijuana - by GrowWeedEasy.com
Why I started growing cannabis

save money & time – compared to buying cannabis, growing is much cheaper easier for me
health reasons – I use medical marijuana for epilepsy
stealth – never have to bring cannabis in from outside the home
personal safety – no need to deal with drug dealers or other shady sources to get cannabis
consistent supply – never run out!
higher quality cannabis & choice of strains – produce exactly what you want
Before you start growing, it’s important that you understand your local laws. If you live in the USA, this website may help.

Cannabis is a weed in the wild that adapts to many climates. Cannabis plants can actually be really easy to grow if you have the right information and know what to do. It can seem impossible to get started if it’s your first time growing, but this website will walk you through everything.

Secret window into cannabis grow tent

Don’t you want to see this when you wake up every morning?

How Long Until You’re Smoking Your Buds? 4 months
After you start growing, it usually takes at least 3 months until harvest for most strains (some just a little less, some strains take longer, and it will also take longer if you grow big plants). After harvest, your cannabis buds takes around a week to dry. Lastly, for the best quality, most growers want to cure their bud for 2+ weeks to get a smoother taste and a higher perceived potency. After being cured for 2-4 weeks, buds will feel stronger and be less likely to cause headaches or anxiety.

In total, you’re looking at a 4 month investment for a cannabis harvest.

Growing Timeline

~3+ Months – Seed to Harvest
~1 week – Drying
2+ Weeks – Curing

Total: 4+ Months

Tell Me More: How Long Does It Take To Grow Weed? What’s the growing timeline?
https://www.growweedeasy.com/how-long-does-it-take-to-grow-weed

Are you ready to see cannabis growing inside your house?

Wouldn't you like to see cannabis plants growing inside your house?

 

 

Growing Cannabis Basics

Cannabis plants are weeds with simple needs. Your cannabis plants will grow as long as you give them the right amount of the following resources..

In order to thrive and grow, your weed needs…

Light (brightness has a huge effect on yields)
Air (fresh air with a slight breeze is best)
a Grow Medium (place to grow, soil isn’t your only choice)
the right Temperature (room temperature or a little warmer is perfect during the day, cannot stand freezing at night)
Nutrients (start at half as much as what’s recommended on the package)
Water (maintain pH for best results, soil likes 6 – 7 pH & hydro likes 5.5 – 6.5 pH)
Whether growing marijuana plants indoors or outdoors, you will need to ensure that it gets the proper amount of these six resources. You will be rewarded with big colas!

Big cannabis cola in hand - this single branch on a plant produced more than two ounces!

What’s The Most Common New Grower Mistake? Lack of Research

One of the most common mistakes made by new weed growers is to conduct spur-of-the-moment experiments and hurt or even kill their plants.

You should always at least do a quick google search before you try any new technique.
Why make your plants be the guinea pig of an experiment that someone else has already tried before?

For example, it may seem like a good idea to give your growing cannabis Miracle-Gro nutrients because it’s easily available/cheap, or plant your seeds in the original Miracle-Gro soil you have laying around the house. Unfortunately the standard Miracle-Gro formula does not contain the right ratio of nutrients for cannabis, especially during the budding stage. Using original Miracle-Gro nutrients during flowering can hurt your plants and reduce your yields.

But how could you possibly know that unless you look it up first?

What nutrients can I use for cannabis?
https://www.growweedeasy.com/cannabis-nutrients

Cannabis nugs in hands

Suggestion: Harvest Your First Plant Before Trying Any Experiments

You don’t want to lose your entire crop to something that has already been tried before and proven not to work, so make sure you do a little research and experiment with caution and moderation.

Another common problem new growers have is the tendency to skip crucial steps like maintaining a proper pH or getting the right kind of nutrients. While you can get lucky and succeed at growing weed without taking these steps, you are a lot more likely to end up plants that die or just never produce any buds.

It can actually be really easy to grow marijuana with the right info. It’s like growing any other plant. You follow a proven set of steps, and before you know it, you’ll be harvesting your first buds.

Start by reading this simple cannabis grow guide and you will soon have all the knowledge you need to start producing your own potent buds today!

Happy cannabis plants under a grow light

Light Needs (Cannabis needs more light than most house plants)

Many cannabis growers like to grow outdoors. Outdoor growers need a accessible, private space that gets 8+ hours of direct sunlight a day for the best results.

Outdoor growers need 8+ hours of direct sunlight a day
Plant in Spring, Harvest in Fall. 

Cannabis plants grow very fast in a short amount of time, and need a lot of energy from the light to grow and produce buds. In the wild, a cannabis plant can grow to the size of tree in less than a year, and it uses energy from light to power that growth.

Many new growers who want to grow indoors like the idea of growing their cannabis plant in a sunny window, like a house plant. Usually the light from a window won’t be enough. While young cannabis plants seem to be able to grow in bright, sunny windows, cannabis plants usually don’t ever produce more than a few wispy hairs during the flowering stage, and may not produce any bud at all. Without any flowers/bud, you’re out of luck.

Indoor growers almost always need grow lights to get buds

Indoors, nearly all growers will need some type of grow light for successful cannabis growth.

Indoor growers usually put their grow lights with a timer to simulate the sun. This makes it easy to turn on and off the lights for each “day” so grow lights are more automated. There are many different sized grow lights, from the CFL light bulbs you already use in your house to bigger, more specialized grow lights that produce pounds of bud at a time.

There are indoor growing options for nearly everyone, even if you’re on a budget or only have a small space to work with, whether you want to grow in a bucket or a whole room.

Indoor growers need a private space and grow lights
There are limitless setup options

What do you need to grow indoors?
https://www.growweedeasy.com/cannabis-supplies-get-started-growing

 

Two Stages of Cannabis Life: Vegetative & Flowering

There are two main stages of a cannabis plant’s life…

Cannabis plants keep getting bigger and bigger with long days, and start making buds when they get long nights.

Here’s the cannabis life cycle in the wild…

Seed sprouts in spring
Cannabis grows for a summer
Days start getting shorter
Cannabis starts making flowers or pollen
Pollination
Female plants make seeds
Cannabis dies for winter
Repeat – Everything starts over again for the next generation
Why is this important?

Cannabis plants go from seed to death in just one year, and they have a certain order for their life stages. This is very important for you to understand as a grower.

As far as a grower is concerned….

A diagram showing the growing timeline of a cannabis plant, from seed to harvest
Seed ⇒ Seedling ⇒ Vegetative ⇒ Flowering ⇒ Harvest

A plant will keep growing vegetatively (just stems and leaves) as long as the plant “believes” it is early spring or summer. Outdoors this happens naturally as the seasons change. Indoors, growers put grow lights on a timer to “tell” the plant when to start flowering.

Cannabis Life Stages

Vegetative – stems and leaves

Flowering – making buds / flowers

It seems simple, and it is! Just remember that there are two stages of life for cannabis, first the vegetative stage, and then the flowering stage (which is followed by harvest).

Male & Female Cannabis Plants

Cannabis plants have a gender. Each plant grows into a “male” or “female” plant. Although about half of plants are male or female, only female cannabis plants produce bud. Getting rid of male cannabis plants also prevents pollination (and seeds).

Did You Know? You can identify gender as young as 3 weeks from seed!

Most growers are only interested in growing female plants so they can harvest the bud.

Female Cannabis Plants Produce Buds

Female cannabis plants grow buds!

Cannabis plants first show their sex at the end of the vegetative stage or at the beginning of the flowering stage.

Male cannabis plants only produce pollen sacs, no buds, and few male plants produce a significant amount of THC or other cannabinoids.

That’s worth repeating. Male weed plants do not produce buds with THC. Most growers throw them away on sight.

Male Cannabis Plants Do Not Produce Bud

Male cannabis plant - does not produce buds

There is no way to determine the gender of a plant initially, just by looking at the seeds, or even by looking at young plants.

Both male and female cannabis plants look exactly the same until they start flowering. There used to be myths and tricks on how to tell male from female plants from a young age, but none actually works 100% of the time. To this day, even scientists are not exactly sure what causes some plants to become male, and some plants to become female.

For most growers, you will need to identify the gender of your plants as soon as possible and remove any males promptly, before they contaminate your females.

Tell me more about what it means for a cannabis plant to be “male” or “female”
https://www.growweedeasy.com/marijuana-boy-girl

 

Did You Know? You can identify gender as young as 3 weeks from seed!

 

How to Get Seeds or Clones – Choosing the Right Strain

The two most popular ways to get cannabis seeds or clones is in person or via online seed banks.

Seeds vs Clones (or read on below)
https://www.growweedeasy.com/seeds-vs-clones

If you want to to reduce the uncertainty and make sure you always grow incredible-quality cannabis, you need to start with great genes.

Just like with animals, the way your cannabis plants turn out will have a lot to do with the genetics they started life with. Each cannabis plant is a mixture of the traits from its two parents.

Tutorial About Choosing the Right Strain
https://www.growweedeasy.com/training#choose-strain

This beautiful frosty cannabis nug is an example of what you can grow by following this tutorialBecause genetics have such a huge impact on your results, it is important to know a little bit about the genetics of the plant you’re working with.

There are three main strains or types of cannabis: indica, sativa, and hybrid strains (hybrid strains are a mix of indica and sativa).

These types are not set in stone. Nearly all cannabis strains you run into with be some sort of hybrid. Some strains lean more indica, others lean more Sativa. Some are a class of their own. I’ve heard some people consider “Haze” to be a strain type, though it’s sometimes considered part of the “Sativa” family.

There is also a very important other type of cannabis; “Ruderalis” or “auto-flowering” strains.

Let me explain…

Indica, Sativa & Hybrids (plus Auto-flowering) Strains

Indica

Indica strains tend to cause more of a body high and tend to grow shorter and bushier.

Sativa

Sativa strains tend to cause more of a cerebral or mental high. Sativas grow larger, have higher light requirements, and take longer to mature than indica plants so a sativa strain of cannabis may need special plant training to be suited for growing indoors. Sativas often have thin, finger-like leaves while indicas have fatter, rounder leaves.

Hybrid

It is often simplest to grow marijuana plants that are a hybrid strain because they have been bred to carry the best traits of both sativa and indica.

Auto-flowering or “Ruderalis” strains

Auto-flowering means these strains will start flowering regardless of its light schedule. These strains are usually a famous strain that has been bred to carry the “auto-flowering” characteristic. When growing with Ruderalis-based cannabis strains such as the Lowryder, you can give the plant up to 18 hours of light a day for the whole grow, and your plant will be ready to harvest in about 3 months. Because of their short lifecycle, Ruderalis cannabis stains generally do not grow taller than 1-2 feet.

Auto-Flowering vs Photoperiod (Regular) Cannabis Strains
https://www.growweedeasy.com/autoflowering-vs-photoperiod

Auto-flowering Liberty Haze plant

If you’re researching what strain of cannabis to grow, pay close attention to the light requirements, grow times, etc. to make sure that it is a good match for your grow area.

Learn more about choosing the right cannabis strain:
https://www.growweedeasy.com/training#choose-strain

Seeds

Seeds are a good way for many people to start growing because they can be easily purchased off the internet and delivered discretely almost anywhere in the world.

Viable cannabis seeds are usually hard and dark colored. If you have cannabis seeds which are small and white, they are often immature and won’t germinate.

Example of Good Cannabis Seeds
(yes, even the lighter colored one)

Viable cannabis seeds- this is what marijuana seeds look like!

Healthy seeds can be stored in your fridge until you’re ready to use them, but it is not recommended that you freeze your seeds. Seeds which are kept in a cool, dry place away from light will remain viable for five years or even longer!

Sometimes you will find good seeds in marijuana that you have purchased (these seeds are called “bagseed”) which can definitely be used to start growing.

The downside of using seeds that you find in the bud you got from your local weed dealer is that about half of the seeds will end up being male, and only half will end being female. You also don’t know what to expect as far as how the plant will tend to grow.

Still, many growers also start growing cannabis with bagseed that they’ve collected. This is a great way to get started growing, and many growers have happily made it to harvest with bagseed.

Some growers get very lucky with bagseed, and end up with great results. But sometimes growers end up growing buds that are nothing like the ones the seeds were found in.

Already have your seeds? Get started with germinating your cannabis seeds.

Whenever possible, get a trusted strain for best results!

It is actually safe and reliable to buy your marijuana seeds online from a reputable seed source. The biggest problem for USA residents ordering online is the long wait time – nearly all cannabis seed sources are located overseas. I’ve had seeds take a month or longer to make it through customs and arrive to my door. Yet as long as you choose to get guaranteed delivery from your seed source, you know that they will always eventually come, even if it takes twice as long as expected.

Learn more about buying cannabis seeds online with safety
https://www.growweedeasy.com/seeds

Getting seeds online will allow you to purchase feminized (all-female) seeds and will also let you pick the exact strain to match your size and time requirements. This can be helpful when setting up your grow space.

Clones

Example of a cannabis clone that has grown rootsClones are an exact copy of another plant. When starting with a clone, you can expect the plant to grow and produce buds in a very similar way to the mother plant it came from. This can be helpful to growers because they know exactly what to expect.

In order to get cannabis clones, you will need to know someone who already has cannabis plants. As far as I know, there’s no way to consistently order cannabis clones online. The only online way to get cannabis plants is by ordering seeds.

You may be able to buy cannabis clones from your local medical marijuana dispensary if you have a recommendation for marijuana from your doctor in a medical state. Unfortunately this option isn’t available for a lot of new growers. One of the great things about starting with seeds is anyone can do it..

Starting with a cannabis clone can save you a couple of weeks to a month compared to starting with seeds because they have a head start on growth.

Using clones instead of regular seeds guarantees the gender of your weed plant because the clones have the exact same genetics as their parent plant including gender.

If you already have female plants, you can clone them to make more plants (copies) without ever having to worry about sexing your plants or creating seeds.

A new cannabis clone showing its first roots

If you’re starting out with a clone, you want to treat it gently for the first day or two that you have it. If your clone hasn’t established roots yet, then you want to make sure that it stays moist and gets gentle light (like from fluorescent tubes) until it develops some roots.

New cannabis clones like warm, wet conditions. Think springtime.

Before your clones have made roots, they to get water through their leaves right until roots have formed. A humid cloner works great for getting clones to root, or you can mist your plants a few times a day until they start forming roots. Some growers will use a heating pad under their clones to help keep things warm. A little warmer than room temperature 72-77 °F (22-25 °C ) is perfect. Many automatic cloners come with a heat setting.

Caring for cannabis clones - think "springtime"

If your clone has already established its roots, then you can put it in its new home with your grow lights a bit further away than normal.

Only give your clone just a little bit of water at first with either no nutrients or a highly diluted nutrient solution. It’s tempting to want to put your lights close to the new baby and give it nutrients because you want to do everything you can to make sure it does okay.

However, in the very beginning, less is more for your clone. Your recently-moved clone is more sensitive to heat and light than an established plant, and putting it in a completely new environment can be stressful. It’s important to check on your clone frequently during its first 24 hours to make sure there isn’t any unforeseen problems such as it tipping over.

Once the clone has started really growing (usually after a couple of days) then you can put your lights closer and start feeding it with full-strength nutrients. At this point you basically treat the clone like a cannabis plant in the vegetative stage (first stage of life).

Get started with creating and caring for your cannabis clones:
https://www.growweedeasy.com/how-to-create-marijuana-clones

Electricity Use (For Indoor Growers)

Electrical outlet - how much electricity does it take to grow cannabis?For small-scale growers, the difference in your electric bill might not be that noticeable. As an example, I grew a single plant under a small 250W HPS grow light, and only ended up paying $278 in electricity for the whole grow over the course of 4 months. I ended up yielding 6.2 ounces (only $45/ounce or $1.60/gram) and we have some of the most expensive electricity rates in the country ($0.37/kWh)! So for small grows, you’re not going to see a huge bump in your electricity.

But for some of the bigger grow lights, the electric bill can grow quite a bit, especially when using AC units. Yet even with the cost of electricity, it’s usually far cheaper for people to grow their own cannabis indoors than to purchase it.

Just to give you a real example, a 600W grow light (one of the larger types of grow lights) uses about the same electricity as a refrigerator.

Each person has different electricity rates depending on where they live, but let me give you an idea with another one of my grow setups. It’s not just a matter of how much electricity you use for the whole grow, it’s also a matter of how much you pay per month and if you’re saving that compared to buying cannabis. As I mentioned, I live in an expensive city in California and in this grow room I have a 600W light, carbon filter, AC unit and a powerful fan. All that uses about $100/month in electricity, and can produce more than a pound of buds at harvest more than twice/year. That’s more than 3 ounces (85 grams) each month for just $100. And I live in a hot area with expensive electricity.

For me, growing indoors saves handfuls of money compared to buying buds, even with the cost of electricity.

For growers who want smaller amounts of cannabis, it’s easy to scale down your growing operation to suite your needs. A space bucket can cost just $100 to set up, a few bucks of electricity each month, and produce up to an ounce of buds at harvest. For some growers, this is more than enough.

It’s important to understand what you want and get in touch with your growing expectations. This will help you choose the right growing setup.

A young cannabis plant in the vegetative stage

Setup Cost

Outdoors, the starting cost is generally less than indoors – no grow lights or electricity, just soil and sunlight – but the hard part about growing outdoors is finding a good spot that’s private, convenient for you to get to, with easy access to water, and 8+ hours of direct sunlight every day.

Outdoors: Free – $200

Indoors, your cost depends on your setup and what you’re looking for. If you want to harvest an ounce here and then, it may cost very little to get started, even just $100 (check out space buckets).

For a premium indoor setup with a grow tent, grow light, fan, plus growing supplies, you’re looking at spending $800 – $1500 to grow a few plants. A setup like this can yield several ounces or even a pound of bud at harvest.

Indoors: $100 – $1500+

Set Up & Supplies

Here’s what you’ll be doing in this section to get set up to start growing cannabis.

Pick Your Grow Space
Choose Growing Medium
Choose Grow Lights (or Sun)
Nutrients (if needed)
Supplies Checklist – Are You Ready to Start Growing?
 

Pick Your Grow Space

Growing Indoors vs Outdoors

There are many considerations to take into account when deciding whether to grow your plant indoors or outdoors.

As someone who lives in the suburbs of a city, with many close neighbors and far away from any wilderness, I only grow weed indoors.

Most cannabis growers have an idea about whether they want to grow indoors or outside, but check this list of pros and cons to help if you’re still not sure

Pros and Cons – Growing marijuana indoors vs. outdoors
https://www.growweedeasy.com/indoors-vs-outdoors 

Indoors

You have more control over everything in an indoor growing environment, which means that indoor growers can consistently produce dank buds, but you also have more responsibility. If you don’t provide everything your plants need, they will die.

What indoor space works best?

You can grow cannabis most anywhere with easy access to water and fresh air…

a spare room
a closet
garage
grow box
grow tent ← Best choice*
extra bathroom
even the inside of a computer case!
Though I recommend a Space Bucket instead 🙂
* I believe grow tents are the best grow space for new cannabis growers. You simply need to decide how big a grow tent you should get for your space, and you’ve already given your plant so much that will improve their environment for better growth. Grow tents are cheap, effective, and will save you a lot of trouble. A quality grow tent is light proof, has reflective walls, contains built-in options to vent heat, a place to hang your lights, and waterproof floors for spills (so you never end up with water on your floor). A nice grow tent looks doesn’t always look like a grow tent to someone who doesn’t know what one looks like (I’ve had someone ask me if my grow tent was where I hung my clothes), but it contains many features that will help your cannabis plant thrive while reducing your work. It is often less expensive to get a quality grow tent than to try to make an effective grow space or grow box on your own.

An example of a cannabis grow tent
Here’s the same grow tent as above, but with cannabis plants inside:

View the inside of a cannabis grow tent

When thinking about where to grow indoors, you should also consider the temperature of your grow space (and remember your temps will likely rise once you have your grow lights running!).

Young growing cannabis plants grow fastest when temps a bit warmer, in the 70-85°F (20-30°C) range.

Temperature is important for growing cannabisWhen plants are a bit older, in the budding/flowering stage, it’s best to keep temps slightly cooler, around 65-80°F (18-26°C) to produce buds with the best color, trichome production and smell.

Because temps are so important, it’s best to be able to have some amount of control over the temperature of your grow area. When growing indoors, your grow lights will give off heat. The more powerful your lights, generally the more heat they give off.

If you’re growing just a few plants in a grow tent or box, usually you can install a fan to pull hot air away from the hot lights and out a window to keep things cool enough.

Learn more about grow room temperature
https://www.growweedeasy.com/temperature

Outdoors

Growing cannabis outdoors is cheaper to get started outdoors since you probably don’t have to get grow lights or create an indoor grow area, though you do have to worry about privacy/stealth, possible pollination, people stealing your plants, bugs, deer and other unexpected outdoor visitors.

If you pick the right strain and live in a good environment, it will likely be cheaper to grow outdoors, since you don’t have to provide as much for your plants. The sun and mother nature will do a lot of the work for you.

And when you’re growing outdoors, you can produce plants like this…

Huge outdoor cannabis plant

Of course when you’re growing outside, it’s not always possible to control the environment perfectly. If it’s dry, you will need to water your plants. If it’s too rainy, you need to protect your plants from getting overwatered.

When it comes to temperatures, a good rule of thumb about cannabis plants is if it’s too hot for you, it’s probably too hot for your plants. And just like humans, cannabis plants can die if exposed to freezing temps.

So if you know it’s going to be extremely hot or cold where you live, you may need to take extra steps to protect your plants from the elements, like setting up a small greenhouse.

More About Indoors vs Outdoors
https://www.growweedeasy.com/indoors-vs-outdoors

Choose Growing Medium

Many new growers instantly think of growing their cannabis in soil.

Soil is the growing medium that most people are familiar with, and one of the most common growing methods, but it’s not the only one.

Common Cannabis Growing Mediums

Soil ← Most Common, Intuitive, Great Flavor in Buds
Inert (Soilless) ← Intuitive, Faster Growth than Soil
Hydroponics ← Fastest Growth, Biggest Yields, Potency
You can successfully grow cannabis plants in soil and other sorts of non-soil (soil-less) mediums, or you could grow your plants directly in water or even in moist air!

Read full tutorial: Soil or Hydro?
https://www.growweedeasy.com/soil-vs-hydro-cannabis

Each growing medium that you use will have different care and watering requirements. I will talk about some of the different options to help you choose the growing medium that’s right for your grow area and experience level.

The most important thing is to choose a growing medium that makes you excited!

Is it your first cannabis grow?

First Grow, Never Grown a Plant in Your Life
First Grow, Already Have Soil or Gardening Experience
I Already Have Grow Experience
 

First Grow, Never Grown a Plant in Your Life 

Recommended growing mediums (go with your instinct!)

Soil
Soilless
Hydroponics
If it’s your first cannabis grow, and you’ve never gardened or grown a plant, it’s okay. Maybe you have a “black thumb” and every plant you’ve ever grown has died.

That’s exactly how I was before I started growing. I managed to kill every plant that ever made it into my possession, even though I was trying my best. I somehow even managed to destroy other people’s plants, with accidental over or under-watering. Sometimes it seemed I just looked at a plant the wrong way and it would dry up and dry.

Even if you’ve never grown any plants before (like I hadn’t) you can still grow cannabis successfully. This website will teach you everything you need to know to breeze through your first harvest.

Example of cannabis buds by a first-time grower

You already have what it takes to grow cannabis as long as you are willing to the follow step-by-step instructions provided here on how to grow weed, almost like following a cannabis growing “recipe,”.

Cannabis plants are weeds in the wild. All your plants need is the right conditions, and they will grow and make beautiful flowers you can harvest and dry for your own unlimited supply of bud.

As a grower, you can give your plants a better environment than they would ever get in the wild, and your plants will reward you with bountiful flowers.

The most important thing is to choose a growing medium that you feel excited about. Don’t be afraid to try the growing medium you really want, even if it seems like it may be too complicated! All growing mediums have their upsides and downsides, but they are all straightforward once you have the information you need to provide a perfect growing environment. Yes, even hydroponics!

 

First Grow, Already Have Soil or Gardening Experience 

Recommended growing mediums (go with your instinct!)

Soil
Soilless
If you’ve grown in soil before, hydroponics may not be something you like unless you’re really interested (in which case, we will guide you). Take a look at a high-yielding hydroponic grow journal from my fellow grower Sirius to see if hydroponics might interest you.

Generally, most growers who have grown in soil tend to go with soil or soilless. When growing in soil, the cannabis will get nutrients from the soil itself. You may also provide extra nutrients in your water. With coco coir, you always provide the nutrients in the water. Other than that, the two methods are similar to each other. Soil is known for better taste, while soilless (particularly coco coir) is known for faster growth, bigger yields, and great potency.

 

If You’ve Grown Cannabis Before, Consider Trying Something New!

Already know which cannabis growing medium you want?

Soil
Soilless
What Container Should I Use?
Hydroponics
 

Soil

Just stick the seed in the soil and go. Choose a great soil for growing cannabis and you’re ready to get started.

Rich composted soil is great for growing cannabis

If you feel certain that you want to grow in soil, do it! Soil is a great way to grow cannabis and there are many different types of soil growing. For those who want something simple and quick to get started, you can use high-quality potting soil and use specially made soil nutrients to give your plants exactly what it needs until harvest. You could also compost your own super soil, which is a relatively advanced way of growing that can be intimidating for new growers who’ve never grown in soil.

Some growers claim growing cannabis in soil produces the best smelling and tasting buds.

General Guidelines for Good Cannabis Soil

No “extended release” or “slow release” nutrients (especially avoid the original Miracle-Gro soil! It will prevent proper budding in the flowering stage)
If you use regular high-quality potting soil that isn’t formulated for a plant like cannabis, you can use specially-made soil nutrients during the grow (especially during the flowering stage) to help make sure your plant gets everything it needs to make buds, without having to worry about getting super special soil
A great soil mix contains ingredients like… coco fiber (i.e. coco coir, coca fiber), perlite, compost, earthworm castings, bat guano, fish meal, crab meal, bone meal, blood meal, kelp meal, peat moss, pumice, composted forest humus, humic acid, sandy loam, soybean meal, alfalfa meal, rock dust, Mycorrhizae fungi, etc
Recommended Soil Brands

Fox Farms*
Roots Organics
Make Your Own Super Soil (advanced)
*About Fox Farms soil for growing cannabis: The Fox Farms company offers several different types of soil that contain different mixes. “Ocean Forest” soil works well by itself for the whole grow, but it may be a bit too strong for young seedlings and cause some light nutrient burn to young plants until they get a little bigger. After they’ve grown bigger, the plants will no longer experience nutrient burn from Ocean Forest. If this is not acceptable, it’s often recommended to mix Ocean Forest with one of the other, lighter soil mixes offered by Fox Farms. A great mix is their Ocean Forest soil mixed with half “Happy Frog” or “Light Warrior” plus about 30% perlite.

Worm castings help create a nutrient-rich soil that cannabis thrives in

Soilless

Get your nutrients, plant your seed, and start watering! Get the same experience as growing cannabis  in soil with nutrients, except experience faster growth and bigger yields.

Cannabis plants grown in coco coirSoilless growing uses an inert medium like coco coir, perlite, vermiculite, etc to grow cannabis plants.

These growing mediums do not have any nutrients, instead you hand-water the plants just like you would in soil, and provide all the nutrients in the water. One of the downsides is there is less of a “buffer” with soilless growing mediums than with soil, which contains nutrients of its own.

Soilless growing is very much like growing in soil with added nutrients. It provides some of the benefits of both soilless and hydroponic growing. Many growers find soilless growing to be as intuitive as soil since both growing methods seem close to what we naturally observe in nature.

With specially made nutrients, the soilless growing experience can be just like growing in soil, but successful soilless growers will be rewarded with faster growth and bigger yields.

Some Possible Soilless Mediums for Cannabis

Coco Coir (coco, coco fiber) <– Most popular
Vermiculite
Promix
Perlite*
* Perlite is occasionally used by itself as a growing medium, but is most often mixed with something else for better drainage and increased oxygen to roots. Perlite usually looks like small white pebbles, but each piece weighs very little. It almost reminds me of popcorn. Perlite is made from a “puffed up” type of volcanic glass and cannot hold onto much water. Many growers mix perlite with their soilless mediums or soil to add air and drainage, and some growers use perlite as a wick for wick systems.

While it can be done, growing cannabis in just perlite is rare. It’s difficult to get perlite to hold enough water, and other growing mediums are much easier to use. But perlite
is often mixed with other mediums or soil for growing cannabis.

Cannabis seedling growing directly in perlite - perlite is not a common growing medium for cannabis when used all by itself

Make Your Own Soilless Mix for Cannabis

50-70% Coco Coir – Coco coir, made from the husks of coconuts, is a proven inert medium for growing cannabis. Like growing hydroponically, coco gets faster growth speed and cannabis yields, but coco can be hand-watered with nutrients, just like soil. Coco coir naturally contains a mix of properties that makes roots grow faster and healthier, and the water-holding properties of coco coir help ensure water is always available to thirsty roots. One of the easiest and most popular soilless growing mediums for cannabis.
30-50% Perlite – The perlite adds extra drainage to coco for ease of watering. Perlite creates small spaces of air in the coco coir, which prevents overwatering and gets more oxygen to the roots. Cannabis roots love oxygen, and perlite lets them get it while the coco coir makes sure roots always stay wet.
Here’s a Seedling Growing in the Above Coco/Perlite Mix

Cannabis seedling growing in coco coir

Sometimes coco coir is already broken up to use ready directly for planting (bagged coco potting mixes include Canna Coco Coir). But most of the time coco coir comes in bricks. All coco coir should be rinsed well before you start your grow (though some packages states the coco has been washed and pH’ed). Brick coco especially needs to be rinsed well to remove extra salt. Bricks are usually much cheaper than the bagged coco coir because each brick is easier and lighter to transport – you add the water at home. Make sure to let a coco coir brick sit in water for at least an hour first – this way you know it’s fully expanded before you start rinsing.

Once you have expanded and thoroughly rinsed your coco coir, it should easily break into a consistency that is a bit like dark rich soil. At this point, mix your coco with perlite; use more perlite in a humid environment, less in a very dry environment. Once your coco and perlite are mixed you’re ready to go!

Coco coir has grown so popular as a growing medium for cannabis that now there are many brands of specialized nutrients for that exact combo.

Find Coco Coir Nutrients for Growing Cannabis
https://www.growweedeasy.com/cannabis-nutrients#growing-coco-coir-nutrients

What Container Should I Use to Hold My Growing Medium?

All containers for growing cannabis need to have drainage holes so water can drain out the bottom
Deeper containers are better than shallow ones – roots tend to grow down and can get rootbound in a shallow or too-small container.

Read the Complete Tutorial on Choosing the Right Cannabis Pot (size, type, etc)

Get a container that provides plenty of oxygen to the roots for faster growth!

Recommended Containers for Growing Cannabis

Standard garden or nursery pot with drainage holes on the bottom
5 gallon bucket (drill your own drainage holes out the bottom)
Fabric Pot (“Smart Pot”) ← One of the best containers for growing marijuana
Air pot – get more air to your cannabis roots
Fabric Pots are Great Containers for Growing Cannabis

Fabric pots or "Smart Pots" are great for growing cannabis

There are popular brands of fabric pots like “Smart Pot,” but you can also make your own fabric pot at home. The great thing about these containers is they get more air and oxygen to the roots, which encourages faster growth.

Which Size Pot Should I Use?

When growing cannabis plants in a container, you have to choose the size of your pot.

A general guide is to have about 2 gallons per 12″ of height. This isn’t perfect, since plants often grow differently, but this is a good rule of thumb.

When in doubt, get a bigger final container size as opposed to a smaller one. Plants that get rootbound from being in a too-small container will grow more slowly and be prone to problems.

It’s not good to transfer plants during the flowering/budding stage, so you want to have your cannabis plants in their final container at least 2 weeks before the beginning of flowering/budding.

How to Transplant Cannabis Without Stress

Final Container for Desired Plant Size – General guide

12″ ~ 2-3 gallon container

24″ ~ 3-5 gallon container

36″ ~ 5-7 gallon container

48″ ~ 6-10 gallon container

60″ ~ 8-10+ gallon container

 

Hydroponics

Choose your setup, get your nutrients, and germinate your seed! Get ready for incredibly fast growth, great yields, and amazing potency.

If you want to grow hydroponically, don’t worry that it’s too complicated – once you set up the right environment, growing hydroponically is just as straightforward as growing in soil. And you will be rewarded with faster growth, bigger yields, and the amazing potency of hydroponically grown buds. Growers who have trouble with hydroponics are usually victims of being given the wrong information. With proper setup and maintenance information, which is usually simple and easy-to-follow, you’ll be able to happily harvest every plant and reap the rewards of hydroponic gardening.

Here they are!

Benefits of Growing  Hydroponic Cannabis

Less Time to Harvest – Shorter vegetative stage gets you to harvest quickly
Yields – Hydro grows consistently get bigger yields than growing cannabis in soil with the same setup
Potency – Many growers claim hydro-grown cannabis buds are more potent than soil-grown ones, and this seems to be true from my experience
Intro to Growing Hydroponic Cannabis
https://www.growweedeasy.com/soil-vs-hydro-cannabis#cannabis-hydro

One of the more common hydroponic grow setups for growing cannabis is known as a “DWC” or “deep water culture” system.

Here’s a diagram showing how DWC works for growing hydroponic cannabis.

DWC (Deep Water Culture) diagram for growing cannabis
In DWC, the roots are located in a nutrient reservoir full of water. Oxygen is provided to the roots by bubbling air through the water with an air pump. There are lots of different variations of the DWC method, including top-fed DWC.

In all hydroponic methods done right…

More oxygen to the roots produces much faster growth than soil
Providing a lot of oxygen at the roots is more important than lots of water – just make sure roots never actually get dry
Keep nutrient levels on the low side in hydro for fastest cannabis growth
After setup, tending to your plants in hydro is straightforward
 

Grow Lights (or Sun)

Light For Growing Cannabis: Do I Need Indoor Grow Lights?

Cannabis plants need a lot of light to make budsIf growing cannabis outdoors, the sun is generally all the light you need. Outdoor growers need to make sure that the plants are in a sunny spot where they get plenty of sunlight throughout the whole day (8+ hours of sunlight a day for best results).

When growing outdoors, you will need to consider that nearly all cannabis plants need to be started (or put outside) in the spring and harvested in the fall.

If growing cannabis indoors, you will need to provide your plant with the light it needs to grow.

Upgrade Guide – Get Help Choosing Your Indoor Marijuana Grow Lights:
https://www.growweedeasy.com/grow-light-upgrade-guide

All Cannabis Grow Lights Need…

Surge Protector – No matter which cannabis grow light you choose, make sure you get a surge protector
Lighting Timer – All indoor grow lights should be put on a lighting timer – these timers will automatically turn your grow lights on and off for you. A mechanical one is shown below, and there are digital lighting timers as well. These are commonly found at hardware stores and have a variety of uses for non-growing purposes.
A lighting timer used to put cannabis grow lights on a schedule
The most common types of indoor grow lights for cannabis are:

HID Grow Lights – MH & HPS
CFLs & Fluorescent Lighting
LED Grow Lights
Complete Guide to All Indoor Cannabis Grow Lights
https://www.growweedeasy.com/grow-lights

High Intensity Discharge (HID) lights

This class of grow lights includes High Pressure Sodium (HPS) and Metal Halide (MH) grow lights. Considered the “gold standard” for growing weed, these lights are powerful and proven to provide great yields. The bigger models use quite a bit of energy and produce heat that may need to be vented from your grow space, but the lower-wattage models of HID lights are much more manageable for the small indoor grower.

Most common HID bulbs:

MH – Metal Halide Grow Lights – used for the vegetative stage, makes white/blue light
HPS – High Pressure Sodium Grow Lights – used for the flowering stage, makes yellow light
(New) Ceramic Metal Halide (Various names for this technology include CMH grow lights, Light Emitting Ceramic, LEC grow lights and LECs) – used from seed to harvest
Metal Halide grow light for cannabisHPS (High Pressure Sodium) grow light for cannabisLEC (Light Emitting Ceramic) - a type of HID grow light for marijuana plants - great for all stage of life! A newly popular type of weed grow light!

Pros of MH/HPS

Most efficient grow light – MH/HPS/LEC grow lights produce the best yields of any grow light (when yields are compared to electricity used)
Cheap setup – MH/HPS/LEC are one of the less expensive cannabis grow light options, especially considering the yields; HIDs provide a lot of wattage and light for your money. Many MH/HPS kits comes with everything you need to hang the lights and turn them on immediately
Easy and intuitive to use – just hang your lights and start growing; cooling options are often built right on the reflector (for example an air-cooled hood)
Lots of tutorials – HID grow lights have been used by the majority of indoor cannabis growers for decades, and nearly all HID grow lights are used exactly the same way. As long as you choose a size of HID grow light that fits your space, you don’t have to worry about a lot of difference between using different models
Looking up at HPS grow lights through the cannabis canopy
HPS grow lights produce yellow light

Cons of MH/HPS

Heat – Bigger models need a way to exhaust extra heat (many growers vent heat outside with a fan)
Height – Need at least 5 feet (1.5 meters) of height for small MH/HPS setups, and 6 or 7 feet (~ 2 meters) of height for a larger setup
Help Me Pick The Right HID Grow Light for My Space
https://www.growweedeasy.com/mh-hps-upgrade-guide

How to set up MH or HPS Grow Lights
How do I setup my MH/HPS Grow Lights in a Grow Tent?
https://www.growweedeasy.com/hps-grow-lights-setup

 

CFLs & Other Fluorescent Grow Lights

CFLs and other fluorescent lighting use a low amount of electricity and work perfectly for growing young cannabis plants or clones. These grow lights are often used during the vegetative stage, which is the first stage of life. Many growers switch to more powerful grow lights in the cannabis flowering stage because because fluorescent lights are usually not bright enough to produce big yields (cannabis needs a lot of light during the flowering stage to make buds).

However, CFLs and fluorescent lights like the T5 can grow cannabis plants from seed to harvest if plants are trained to grow short and bushy. When used in the flowering stage, these grow lights usually don’t yield as much as other types of grow lights, but they can be a great choice for someone looking to harvest just a few ounces at a time, especially those who don’t have a lot of height to work with!

Two most common fluorescent grow lights for cannabis:

CFLs
T5 panel
CFL grow lights are a good option for growing cannabis when there's limited heightT5 panels are good cannabis grow lights when height is limited

 

Pros of CFLs & Fluorescent Grow Lights

Cheap setup – CFL and T5 grows can be started on a small budget. Many growers feel they are a great way to “get your feet wet” as far as growing without putting in a big initial investment.
Low height needed – CFLs are sold as individual light bulbs and T5s are sold as several long tubes in a panel, but each needs only a few feet of height for successful growing
Stealth – Some of the best high-stealth options because of low height needed for these grow lights. CFLs can be “plugged in” to almost any space and can be bought at the supermarket, which makes CFLs a great choice for a small stealthy setup like growing in a space bucket. A T5 panel is found at most garden stores and doesn’t even need a light socket, it can be plugged directly into a wall.
Options for low heat, low electricity – Just a few CFLs or a single T5 doesn’t produce much heat or use much electricity
Cons of CFLs & Fluorescent Grow Lights

Low yields – These grow lights tend to pull in very small yields unless you use a lot of them
Heat – Each CFL bulb produces a bit of heat (especially the big bulbs), and growers who use many CFLs or fluorescent tubes will need  to exhaust extra heat (usually by venting heat outside with a fan).
Least efficient grow lights – When considering light produced (and yields) for electricity used, CFLs are the least efficient grow lights. T5s are made for gardening and do a bit better, but still not as well as other grow lights.
Daily Maintenance – It can be difficult to position CFLs near plants, and lights need constant adjustment through the grow
Help Me Pick The Right CFLs for My Grow Space
https://www.growweedeasy.com/cfl-upgrade-guide

I actually started growing indoors with CFLs in coco coir, and they served me well. I believe CFL grow lights are a great choice for a small hobby grower who just wants to harvest a few ounces at a time. They are also a great way to get introduced to growing cannabis without making a big investment or using a lot of space.

Picture of my first grow with CFLs

Here’s a tutorial I wrote on how to grow cannabis with CFLs
(this is the method I used when I first started growing)
https://www.growweedeasy.com/easiest-grow-method-cfl-coco-coir

LED Grow Lights

LED grow lights are a relatively new type of grow light which claim to produce better quality buds and bigger yields, while using less electricity and producing less heat than other grow lights.

But are all the claims true? Some are, while other claims are misleading. Protect yourself and learn what you need to know about LED grow lights for growing cannabis.

If you’re not sure what to get, I encourage you to look at LECs, which seem to be consistently getting better yields than LEDs in our grow forum!

LED grow lights are getting more effective for growing cannabis every year

Pros of LEDs

Cutting Edge & Custom Spectrum – One of the newest type of cannabis grow lights, LED grow lights are unlike anything else on the market for growing cannabis. In the last few years, prices have come way down and quality has gone up. LED yields are improving every year and there are now many reliable models of LED that have been proven for growing cannabis
Stealth – Small LED spotlights or panels can be great for stealth growing since they can fit in many sized spaces, plus they usually have a built-in heatsink to disperse heat into the grow space (instead of letting the heat beam down directly on the plants)
Options for low heat, low electricity – A small LED panel doesn’t produce much heat or use much electricity
Cannabis plants flower well under LED grow lights that have been made for plants like cannabis

Cons of LEDs

Expensive setup – LED grow lights are the most expensive cannabis grow lights when considering the price for how much light will be produced
Heat – Each LED panel produces a bit of heat (especially the high-wattage models), and growers who use a lot of LEDs will need to exhaust extra heat like they would with any other grow light (usually by venting heat outside with a fan)
Using LEDs Requires Skill – each model of LED grow light needs to be used differently. The size of LED chips, the reflectors for each bulb, and other differences from each model make it difficult to make any generalizations about how to use a particular LED panel. You can’t use your LED panel the same way your friend does unless it’s the exact same model from the same manufacturer. Even if your LED panels look the same, they may need to be used differently so they don’t hurt your plants. It is very important to ask the manufacturer how far a LED panel should be kept from the top of your plants, and how big a space the panel will be able to cover at that height.
Light Burn and Bleaching – Because some models of LEDs are so powerful, it’s important to avoid using LEDs incorrectly (for example keeping the panel too close to the top of your plants). Keeping LEDs too close to your plants can cause light burn, even when the grow space is completely cool. Basically, LEDs can be so bright that they actually burn your plants. It is common for leaves directly under an LED panel to look stressed, especially when the panel is kept too close, with leaves under the lights sometimes showing browning, spot, crispiness or random deficiencies. There is some speculation that minor stress to the plant is part of what causes the increased bud quality at harvest from LEDs.
Typically Lower Yields than HIDs – Some LED models do produce really great yields. LEDs usually get far better yields than CFLs or T5s for the amount of electricity used, but they just can’t compete with MH/HPS/LEC grow lights when it comes to yields, at least not yet. Don’t listen to marketing hype – some models of LED panels are very effective at growing cannabis, but just make sure you investigate claims that seem too good to be true. Always get personal testimony from a cannabis grower (especially with pictures or video) to back up claims made by LED manufacturers. From all the actual cannabis LED grow journals I’ve seen, LED grow lights currently just don’t seem to get as high of yields as HIDs (when you consider how much electricity it takes to run the lights). But cannabis yields under LEDs are getting better every year as we make better models and learn more about them, so perhaps that will be changing soon!
I’ve used LED grow lights and been pleased with my results. The bud quality and smell from LED-grown bud is superb, and LEDs are a class of their own. That being said, I generally wouldn’t recommend that new growers get LEDs unless they’re willing to do a bit of research about how to use their lights to get the best results. They are less intuitive and just tend to require more time and effort to “dial them in” to your grow than other types of light.

Cannabis plants grown under LED grow lights

Always beware of scam LED sellers! You should always conduct research to determine the best LED grow light for your space. There are some crooked LED sellers, which is why it’s recommended you only purchase LED grow lights from a trusted seller who can answer questions and offer a guarantee on their lights. The LED grow lights that come directly from China often have poor light spectrums which cause plants to grow a little funky and not produce as well as a more professional LED panel.

Learn about (a few) LED models which are proven to grow cannabis
https://www.growweedeasy.com/led-upgrade-guide

On Choosing Your Cannabis Grow Lights…

Each type of light system has their pros and cons, but you will need to find the one that fits your budget, grow area, and grow style!

In the end, I highly encourage you to pick the grow light that sticks out to you, or seems more interesting. They all work great, and what’s most important is that you enjoy your grow!

Complete Guide to Indoor Cannabis Grow Lights
https://www.growweedeasy.com/grow-lights

Nutrients (if needed)

Getting cannabis-friendly nutrients is important if you plan to use nutrients during your grow. Some types of nutrients just don’t contain the right “stuff” for the best plant growth and bud development.

Cannabis nutrients are easy to use – just follow the directions, like a recipe

Unless you have composted your own cannabis super soil, you will most likely want to supplement your cannabis grow with nutrients to make sure plants are getting everything they need.

If you’re growing in soil, you will want to get nutrients made for soil.

If you are growing in any medium besides soil, you will need to get hydroponic nutrients (nutrients specially formulated for hydroponic growing). Some popular soilless mixes for growing cannabis have special nutrients, for example there are many nutrient systems made specifically for growing cannabis in coco coir.

Learn everything you need to know about cannabis nutrients:
https://www.growweedeasy.com/cannabis-nutrients

Fox Farms makes great nutrient systems for growing cannabisCannabis coco coir nutrients from House & GardenGeneral Hydropnics Flora trio is a great choice for growing cannabis in hydro
A marijuana-compatible nutrient system will contain everything your cannabis plant needs throughout the grow, and each of the systems I recommend on my cannabis nutrients page comes with a nutrient feeding chart that explains exactly how much nutrients to add at each stage, like a recipe you follow to water your plants.

Use the included nutrient schedule to know how much to provide to your cannabis plantsKeep in mind that you should treat the nutrient feeding chart that comes with your nutrients as the maximum amount to provide to your plants. I recommend that cannabis growers who are using a new type of nutrient for the first time to start with a fraction (I usually start with half) of the recommended nutrient levels and work your way up only if you see signs of nutrient deficiencies.

Every nutrient schedule is considered a place to start, and to get the absolute best results, you may have to adjust the intensity (add more or less water) depending on what your plants tell you.

Some cannabis strains love high amounts of nutrients, while others are actually very sensitive and will do best with half the amount of nutrients as other strains. If you start at half strength, I recommend to only move up to a higher dose of nutrients if needed. Use as little nutrients as possible for each plant (without the plant showing nutrient deficiencies) to achieve the best taste in your harvested buds.

Because of this natural variation between plants, there’s no one universal nutrient schedule that works for all strains, but most strains have very similar nutrient needs to each other.

Complete Tutorial: Choose the right cannabis nutrients for your setup
https://www.growweedeasy.com/cannabis-nutrients

Nutrients, continued: The Importance of Root pH

In order for your plants to be able to actually absorb the nutrients through their roots, they need the right pH of the root environment. This is especially important for any growers using liquid nutrients.

The easiest way to maintain proper pH is to test and adjust the pH of your water before you water your plants.

Complete Cannabis pH Tutorial:
https://www.growweedeasy.com/ph

Some people may get lucky and successfully grow cannabis without testing the pH of their water, but many growers using liquid nutrients  who don’t test for pH will start seeing signs of nutrient deficiencies and other nutrient problems.

This is because the pH actually affects the form that nutrients take. Some forms are easier for the plant to absorb that others. So that means that even if the right amounts of nutrients are present, your plants just can’t absorb them if the pH is not right.
.
It’s actually really easy, quick, and cheap to learn how to check and adjust the pH of your water, and will take you less than 5 minutes each time you water your plants.

Here’s an Example of a pH Kit

General Hydroponics sells one of the most popular pH kits for growing cannabis
You simply use a specially made pH kit to quickly test and and adjust the pH of your water. The results of paying attention to pH (bigger yields, more dense buds and healthy plants) speak for themselves.

A general rule of thumb is to keep a root pH that ranges from 6.0-7.0 for soil, and a pH between 5.5 – 6.5 for hydroponics. There’s no exact number you need to hit. A little bit of range is actually healthy, since different nutrients are absorbed better at different pHs.

What pH are you looking for when growing cannabis?

Soil: 6.0 – 7.0 pH

Hydroponics: 5.5 – 6.5 pH

Learn everything you need to know about pH and growing cannabis:
https://www.growweedeasy.com/ph

Supplies Checklist – Are You Ready to Start Growing?

The following checklist is a quick summary of everything you’ve gone through so far. Before you start growing, make sure you’ve got everything from this checklist.

 

Grow Space

Outdoors

You’ve picked a very sunny and private place to grow
You have easy access to this space
You can bring water to your plants when needed
You’re sure no one else knows about the spot. As far as privacy, try leaving a few $5 bills in the area and come back a few weeks later, if the $5 bills are still around, you have some evidence that no one else has visited this spot since you left.
Indoors

Grow Space – room, grow tent, grow box, etc. Your cannabis plants need a place to grow! I recommend getting a grow tent in the size that you want if you’re not sure. They create the perfect environment for growing cannabis, and they’re actually pretty inexpensive compared to building a grow box at home.
Temperature Control – some growers get lucky and happen to have a space that’s just the right temperature. For most indoor growers, they will need a fan to vent out extra hot air from the grow lights. Some growers in cold climates will have to protect plants from cold or freezing temperatures. Discover everything you need to understand about controlling temperature in the grow room: https://www.growweedeasy.com/temperature
 

Growing Medium

If growing outside you most likely are going to use soil. For indoor growers, by this point you’ve chosen your growing medium of the many options available to you. Learn more about different growing mediums for cannabis here: https://www.growweedeasy.com/soil-vs-hydro-cannabis

 

Grow Lights

Outdoors

The sun is all you need. Make sure plants are getting 8+ hours of direct sunlight every day for the best results.
Indoors

You’ve picked a grow light for your space that excites you. Here’s some more help choosing which grow light if you’re still not sure and here’s a complete list of all the most popular cannabis grow lights: https://www.growweedeasy.com/grow-lights
You’ve tested your grow light(s), hung your grow light(s) in your grow space, and plugged them in. Learn how to install MH/HPS grow lights with a cheap exhaust system: https://www.growweedeasy.com/hps-grow-lights-setup
You’ve got your grow lights on an electrical timer. As I mentioned earlier, indoor growers should have an electrical timer to automatically turn grow lights on and off so plants get a “day” and a “night” period without you having to remember to turn the lights on and off yourself.. The simple models of lighting timers are inexpensive and can be easily found at hardware stores or online.
 

Nutrients

Choose the cannabis nutrients (if any) you plan on using with your cannabis plants. Learn more about nutrients here: https://www.growweedeasy.com/cannabis-nutrients

 

Cannabis Plants

Get your cannabis clones or order your seeds. Without any plants, growing cannabis is impossible! Learn more about where to find cannabis seeds online here (with seed shipping worldwide, including the USA, UK and Australia!):
https://www.growweedeasy.com/seeds

That’s It! You’re ready to start growing!

Get Started!

You’ve now got everything you need to grow your own cannabis. Let’s get started!

 

Germinate Seeds or Care for Clones

If you have cannabis seeds, it’s time to get them to sprout.

Basically you want to give your seeds a warm, wet place to start growing. There are many methods and techniques for germination, but I believe the easiest way to start seeds is to place them in a starter cube or seedling plug.

Rapid Rooters are an easy way to germinate cannabis seeds

I use Rapid Rooters because they are easy to work with – you just stick your cannabis seed in the Rapid Rooter plug, keep your seed warm and slightly moist, and let the Rapid Rooter do its magic. Sprouts emerge and roots appear in just a few days. Once your seed has sprouted, you  just stick the Rapid Rooter directly in your container or hydroponic system.

Another great option for new growers is to germinate their seeds directly in their final growing medium.

Sometimes nature’s way is the easiest way. In nature, cannabis seedlings would sprout in soil, and they would emerge as their taproots start growing down.

Cannabis seedling emerging from soil

One of the biggest benefits of planting your seed directly in the growing medium is you don’t have to worry about moving young seedlings. Because seeds are already in their final resting place, they will immediately start adjusting to the environment. Every time you transplant or move a sprouted seed, it can cause stress as the young plant needs to readjust its new surroundings.

Soil – Plant seeds a knuckle deep (0.5-1 inch OR 1.3 cm – 2.5 cm) in moist yet not soaking soil. Use a light or a heating pad to keep things warm. This is one of the easiest marijuana germination methods for beginners.
Coco Coir or other soilless growing medium – Plant in a similar way to soil
Hydroponics – I highly recommend using Rapid Rooters or other hydroponic-friendly starter cubes for starting seeds in hydro systems. Just place the seed in the Rapid Rooter, and then place the plug in your system.
A cannabis seedling
The first two leaves from your cannabis plant will be round (called cotyledons), but after that all the leaves will be serrated like the cannabis leaves you are probably familiar with.

Learn everything you need to know about germinating cannabis seeds here: https://www.growweedeasy.com/germinate

If you’re starting with a cannabis clone, you want to treat it gently for the first day or two. It’s common for new clones to be a bit drooper, and it’s your job to make sure it stays healthy and happy. If your clone hasn’t established roots yet, then you want to make sure that it stays moist and gets gentle light (like from fluorescent tubes) until it develops some roots.

This cannabis clone is showing roots
New clones need to get their water through their leaves until their roots haven’t formed, which is why a nice humid cloner works great. If no humidity cloner is available, some growers mist their clones a few times a day until they start forming roots. A little warmer than room temperature 72-77 °F (22-25 °C ) is great for clones. Many automatic cloners come with a heat setting.

Don’t give new clones 24 hours of light, without any dark periods. This can slow down the rooting process. Rooting seems to happen best when there’s some amount of darkness each day.
I recommend starting new clones on a 16/8 or 18/6 (Light/Dark) schedule when you introduce lights.

The most important thing is to keep a close eye on your new clones or seedlings until they’ve become well-established.

Once young plants are growing new leaves and getting taller, they are officially in the vegetative stage.

 

Vegetative Stage
This section will explain how to care for young cannabis plants in the vegetative stage.

When your cannabis plant first starts growing brand new leaves and stems, it marks the beginning of the vegetative stage.

The vegetative stage is a period of growth where your cannabis plant just focuses on getting strong and big. During this stage, cannabis plants will only grow leaves and stems, and will not grow any bud.

A happy cannabis plant in the vegetative stage

Here’s what you’ll find in this section about the cannabis vegetative stage:

Vegetative Light Schedules
Daily Plant Care in the Vegetative Stage
Plant Training
 

Vegetative Light Schedules

Outdoors

Cannabis plant grown outdoorsCannabis plants should be first placed outside in the Spring. The best time differs depending on where you live in the world, but as long as nights are shorter than 12 hours and days are growing longer, it should be a good time to place plants outside. If plants are placed outside too early (while nights are too long) they may start budding right away, instead of staying in the vegetative stage. Therefore make sure your days are long enough to support vegetative growth. Clones should be put out about 2-3 weeks later than seeds because they’re more prone to flowering early.

The vegetative stage is the easiest part of growing outdoors, and as long as you provide the plants with plenty of light, needed nutrients, and water, your plants should thrive.

Keep a close eye on plants for bite marks or other problems, such as bugs, caterpillars, etc.

Outdoors, the amount of time spent by the plant in the vegetative stage is determined by the sun and how long the days are. Plants that get a lot of direct sunlight can grow into trees over the course of one summer.

As the days start growing shorter in the late summer or fall, your cannabis will automatically switch to the flowering stage on its own.

The further away from the equator, the sooner cannabis will start flowering and be ready to harvest. For outdoor grow areas closer to the equator, cannabis will be ready to harvest later in the year.

The rhythms of the sun are very important to outdoor cannabis growers

Indoors

Indoor growers can keep cannabis plants in the vegetative stage for as long or short as they want by providing at least 18 hours of light a day. This is usually accomplished by putting grow lights on a timer.

Unlike outdoor growers, indoor growers have more control over the final size and shape of their plant.

Having a light period that lasts 18+ hours each day will make cannabis think that it’s summer/grow time. As long as cannabis plants get 18+ hours of light a day, they will remain in the vegetative stage, growing only stems and leaves.

Use a timer to automatically turn indoor grow lights on and off

Use a timer to automatically turn cannabis grow lights on and off
Indoor growers usually provide either a 18-6 or 24-0 light schedule during the vegetative stage of cannabis. 18-6 means 18 hours of light and 6 hours of dark each day. 24-0 means 24 hours of light with no darkness each day.

18-6 vs 24-0 Light Schedule for Indoor Growing

Some people will keep their lights on 24 hours during this stage while others will keep the lights on a schedule where they’re 18 hours on and 6 hours off every day.

Which is better? 

The answer depends on which grower you ask, and may even be different from plant to plant. Most weed strains are fine and will flourish when given 24 hours of light a day in the vegetative stage. Yet some strains may do better on 18/6.

If electricity costs are a big concern, you may want to consider a 18/6 light schedule in order to help keep electricity costs down. This also allows growers to use the 6 hours of darkness to help cool the grow area. If your grow area gets too hot at certain times of the day, you could set your 6 hours of darkness to happen during that time, so lights aren’t running when it’s hot.

According to the Marijuana Horticulture Bible (pg 38), research has shown that most strains of marijuana do grow faster when given 24 hours of light during the vegetative stage.

There will always be growers who feel that cannabis plants need some time with the light off (a dark period) in order to have optimal growth, while others believe that the extra hours of light are better since they give your plants slightly faster growth in veg.

This cannabis plant in the vegetative stage is loving life

However, many growers seem to agree that ruderalis (auto-flowering) strains of marijuana grow fastest when given just 18 hours of light a day. So if you are growing auto strains, you may want to consider an 18-6 light schedule.

I personally keep my lights on and 18-6 schedule (18 hours of light, 6 hours of dark) for all my plants during the vegetative stage. It’s easy and my cannabis plants grow fast and healthy. Some delicate strains and autoflowering strains seem to get stressed by a 24-hour light period, and I believe many strains seem to grow healthier with a cool dark period every day.

However, I used to grow using 24 hours of light a day for my cannabis plants in veg, and they grew just fine. 24 hours of light/day provides somewhat faster growth than an 18/6 schedule because plants are getting more light to make energy. It’s up to you to decide which light schedule is best for you. Both work great.

A short, bushy cannabis plant under a MH grow light

Daily Care in the Vegetative Stage

In the vegetative stage, your job is simple. Cannabis plants grow fast and are tough in the vegetative stage.

To keep your cannabis happy and healthy, you need to do the following

Provide water – Water plants when top inch of soil feels dry to the touch. In containers, make sure water can drain freely out the bottom. In a hydro setup, there will always be plenty of water.

Nutrients – if providing nutrients, start using the included nutrient schedule at ½ strength, and only raise to higher levels of nutrients if needed. Simply add the directed amount nutrients to your water before giving it to plants or adding to reservoir. Manage pH levels if using liquid nutrients.

Provide light – Keep plants in sun or use your vegetative grow light as directed. Simply turn grow lights on and keep at the recommended distance from the top of your plants. Outdoors plants will continue vegetating until days start growing short. Indoors plants will stay in the vegetative stage as long as they’re getting 18+ hours of light a day

Not too cold, not too hot – Vegetative cannabis plants prefer a comfortable room temperature or slightly warmer. 70-85°F (20-30°C) is great. Avoid low humidity in the vegetative stage if possible. Never allow plants to experience freezing temps

Air circulation – Make sure cannabis gets a constant supply of fresh air so plants get the CO2 they need to grow, and keep air moving so there are no hot spots and leaves are always moving/rustling. Outdoors you may want to put up wind breaks if it gets too windy so plants aren’t being waved around.

Some things to look out for during your first grow:

Strange coloring or spotting in your leaves. It is normal a few older and lower leaves to turn yellow or brown and die as the plant matures. It is also normal for all the leaves to start turning yellow in the last week or two before harvest time as your plant pulls nitrogen from the leaves into the mature buds. Other than those exceptions, your leaves (optimally) should always look green and healthy during the whole grow.
Keep an eye out for leaves that are falling off, curling up or dying at a rate of more than a couple of leaves every few days. If your plant is losing more leaves than it’s growing, you know there’s a problem.
Any sort of rotten or bad smell often indicates bacteria, mold, or rotting. Investigate your system to see if you can find the source of the bad smell. If your plants are starting to smell pretty skunky towards the end of your flowering stage, that’s totally normal.
Keep an eye out for signs of mold on your buds or leaves. If you see something on your leaves or buds that does not look like trichomes, you may be seeing the first signs of mold. A common mold looks like white powder on your leaves and is known as “Powdery White Mildew.”
Very slow growth means that something is wrong. Use this 7-step checklist to figure out what it is: https://www.growweedeasy.com/7-step-cure
Keep an eye out for “stretching” or when your plant grows very tall with a lot of space between nodes, as opposed to getting bushy and growing lots of leaves. This usually indicates that the plant needs more light and is trying to “reach” for the sun.
 Look out for any signs of bugs including mucus trails, eggs, spots, etc.
 Watch out for any other signs your plant isn’t growing vibrant and healthy.
Don’t worry about every little thing, but if you feel like your plant may be having some sort of problem, try to identify what it is and fix it as soon as possible! Many times a problem can be fixed if it’s caught in the early stages, and won’t have an effect on yields.

How often do I water my plants?

Water pouring out of a faucetSeedlings may need less water at a time until they are growing vigorously. Especially if young plants are in a big container, avoid giving a lot of water at a time until the plants starts growing faster. Once plant is growing new leaves and stems regularly, start watering using the techniques explained below.

Water plants when soil feels dry up to your first knuckle.

How to water cannabis properly…

Wait until the top of the growing medium is dry about an inch deep (up to your first knuckle – just use your finger to poke a hole in the soil and see if it feels dry).
Add water until you see at least 20% extra runoff water drain out the bottom of your pot. Go back to step 1. Note: If water takes a long time to come out the bottom, or if pots take longer than 5 days to dry out before the next watering, you may actually have a problem with drainage
Some growers also use the “lift the pot” method to decide when to water your plants (basically wait until your pot feels “light” since the plants have used up all the water). It’s up to you to decide what’s easier for you.

Learn more about watering plants perfectly every time:
https://www.growweedeasy.com/how-often-water-marijuana

Is My Temperature Okay?

Vegetative cannabis plants prefer a comfortable room temperature or slightly warmer. 70-85°F (20-30°C) is great. Avoid low humidity in the vegetative stage if possible.

Cannabis plants don't like too hot or too cold temperatures
Make sure to always check the temperature as experienced by your plants, not the ambient room temperature. Check the temperature directly under the light where the top of your plants are located. If temperature feels too hot for your hand after 10 seconds, it’s too hot for your cannabis and you need to take steps to bring the temperature lower. If it’s just a hot spot, you can use small fans to disperse the heat and provide good air circulation in the room.

Cannabis plants cannot stand cold temperatures. Freezing temps can kill cannabis. So if plants are kept in a cold area (for example a basement), take steps to prevent the plants or roots from getting too cold. Grow lights will help keep the plant warm, but make sure the bottoms of the plants have a protective barrier from anything that might be too cold.

Vegetative cannabis plants prefer a comfortable room temperature or slightly warmer. 70-85°F (20-30°C) is great. Avoid low humidity in the vegetative stage if possible.

Learn more about temperature for the vegetative stage of cannabis:
https://www.growweedeasy.com/temperature#seedling-and-vegetative-stage

What if I run into problems?

It’s important to keep a close eye on your personal garden during your first couple of grows, and it is inevitable that you will make some sort of mistake or have some sort of problem with your plants.

No grower ever has a “perfect” grow

A good grower always keeps a close eye on their plants, so they can catch and correct any issues before the plant is permanently damaged.

It’s okay to make mistakes. Just keep an eye out and fix them!

Marijuana plants are very resilient, especially in the vegetative stage. As long as you fix any problem that is hurting them, they will usually bounce back quickly and go on to produce fine buds. Problems or nutrient deficiencies that happen to cannabis in the vegetative stage do not have much effect on flowering/budding as long as issues are corrected right away

Here’s a list of marijuana problems, symptoms and cures: https://www.growweedeasy.com/marijuana-symptoms

Plant Training

Plant training is not crucial to success. You can get to harvest without training your plants. But plant training is crucial to getting the best yields from your grow lights. Outdoors, growers may want to train plants to grow short and wide, so they stay out of sight while producing a big yield.

This vegetating cannabis plant has been trained into a bushy monster with many colas

Cannabis growers often want cannabis plants to grow into a certain size and shape to produce the best yields. The best time to train your cannabis plant is in the vegetative stage. There is very little plant training that can be done in the flowering stage.

So if you have special space requirements, make sure you learn about training your plants before they get too big!

As a grower, you have a lot of control over the final size and shape. Plant training techniques allow you to create a cannabis plant that grows the way you want.

This cannabis plant has experienced some extreme LST (low stress training) & other growth control techniques

A cannabis plant that is trained to grow short and wide takes full advantage of indoor grow lights.

This cannabis plant was trained in the vegetative stage to grow short and bushy, now it's buds are fat from being so close to the grow lights

Notice how each of the colas are about the same size, since the plant was trained so that all colas received the same amount of light.

Common cannabis training techniques:

Low Stress Training (LST)
Supercropping (Extreme LST)
Sea of Green (SoG)
Screen of Green (ScrOG)
Intro to Cutting Your Plants For Better Growth
Topping
FIMing
Main-Lining (Creating a Manifold)
Defoliation (Advanced Only)
An example of cannabis main-lining (building a manifold)

No matter how well you train your plants, some grow patterns are going to be determined by your plant’s genes, especially in the flowering stage. You can control the genetics by choosing to start with a great strain, and plant training will give you the tools you need to get your cannabis to grow the way you want, so you get the best yields possible.

Learn About All Cannabis Training Techniques Here:
https://www.growweedeasy.com/training

How long should cannabis plants be kept in the vegetative stage?

When growing indoors, the length of time to keep your plant in the vegetative stage will vary with how big you want your final plant to be. The longer your plant stays in the vegetative stage, the bigger it will get.

Some people will turn their cannabis plants over to flowering when they’re barely more than a seedling while others will wait until the plant is much larger, after several months.

A cannabis plant can stay in the vegetative stage for virtually forever, and plants can be kept in the vegetative stage for years if given enough hours of light each day. This is often how growers keep great genetics – they’ll keep a “mother plant” in the vegetative stage, and take clones off the plant when needed.

Cannabig plants in the vegetative stage can continue to vegetate indefinitely if they're never given a 12-12 light schedule

Many indoor growers believe that it’s better to make many smaller plants and harvest often as opposed to having large plants and harvesting infrequently.

If you are trying to keep your plants smaller, you will want to keep them in the vegetative stage for a shorter amount of time. For bigger plants, let them stay in the vegetative stage for longer until they’ve reached the size you want. The time spent in the vegetative stage is a big part of what sets the final height of the plant at harvest.

A good rule of thumb is to let your plants stay in the vegetative stage until it reaches about half its final height. Cannabis plants often double in height after the switch to the flowering stage. The amount of “flowering stretch” is dependent on your strain, which is why it’s important to have picked a strain that suits your needs.

A strain that is labeled…

Short – usually stretches less than double the height after switch to flowering stage
Average – may double in height after switch to flowering stage
Tall – may double or triple in height after switch to the flowering stage
 

Flowering Stage
The cannabis “flowering stage” is when your female weed plants start to grow flowers (buds) and your male plants reveal themselves by growing pollen sacs that look like little balls.

Your plants will start flowering in response to the amount of light they get each day. As long as your cannabis plants receive a 12+ hour dark period every day, plants will stay in the flowering stage until harvest.

In the flowering stage, your cannabis plants will reveal their gender. Male plants grow “pollen sacs” (looks like bunches of grapes), and female plants grow wispy white hairs (pistils) at the joints of the plant.

Here’s what cannabis pre-flowers look like for male and female plants:

Cannabis pre-flowers diagram - chart shows difference between male and female preflowers
How can I tell if my plant is male or female? (more pics)
https://www.growweedeasy.com/preflowers

Get rid of male plants immediately to prevent pollination and seedy buds!

Here’s what you’ll find in this section about the cannabis flowering stage:

When Does Flowering Start?
Initial Growth Spurt – the flowering “stretch”
Bud Growth (and how to increase yields)
When to Harvest
Trimming, Drying & Curing
 

When Does Flowering Start?

Outdoors

If you’re growing outdoors, your cannabis will naturally start flowering when the days start getting shorter.

Cannabis grown outdoors can grow to the size of trees

Make sure plants don’t get any light during their nights. If the dark period is interrupted at night (for example, by spotlights, street lights, etc), then they plant may never start flowering, or may revert back to the vegetative stage if it’s already started flowering.

Plants that get light during their dark period may even turn into a hermie, a plant with both male and female parts (which you don’t want).

Learn more about hermies here: https://www.growweedeasy.com/hermie-plant-buds-balls

Indoors

Indoor growers need to change their light schedule to to 12 hours on and 12 hours off to get marijuana plants to start the flowering stage. This is usually accomplished by changing your lighting timer to a 12-12 schedule so lights automatically turn off for 12 hours a day.

You can pretty much pick any time to be their new ‘morning.’ If you’re concerned about your electricity usage, you may be able to get cheaper electricity rates at night so it may be beneficial to have your plant’s ‘day’ time be at night. If you have trouble with heat from your lights, it may also be easier to keep your grow room cool if the lights only turn on at night.

When changing from the vegetative stage to the flowering stage, what’s most important is to make sure your plants get 12 hours of completely uninterrupted darkness each day.

Changing the light schedule indoors makes your plants “think” that winter is approaching, which is why they start making buds. Just like with outdoor plants, make sure that plants don’t get any light during their 12 hours of “off” time. Light leaks can be a big problem during the flowering stage. If you do not maintain consistent night periods, your plants can stop flowering and revert back to the vegetative stage, or even turn into a hermaphrodite.

A hermaphrodite, or “hermie,” is a plant with both male and female parts (which you don’t want). Hermies grow sex organs of both genders, so female plants start growing male pollen sacs which can cause pollination and seedy buds.

Learn more about hermies here: https://www.growweedeasy.com/hermie-plant-buds-balls

If you must visit your plants during their night period, it’s best to get a green light either from a garden or hardware store in order to not disturb your plants during their ‘slumber.’

The reason a green light works at night  is because plants reflect back green light instead of absorbing it (hence their green color). Phytochrome, the photoreceptors that cannabis uses to tell whether it’s “day” or “night” is not sensitive to the green spectrum of light. Therefore a green light is pretty much ‘invisible’ to your plants and won’t affect their dark periods.

The flowering stage is one of the most exciting parts of marijuana growing, but it is also the toughest stage life life for cannabis. While budding, plants are more prone to issues, for example during the flowering stage your plant is much more likely to suffer from nutrient problems even if you’re doing everything the same as you were during the vegetative stage.

It’s very important to stay on top of problems in the flowering stage!

If there’s a nutrition problem in the vegetative stage, the plant will just keep growing new leaves to replace any that are lost, but towards the end of the flowering stage, the plant stops making new leaves altogether while it’s focusing on make huge buds.

Therefore, if your leaves get burnt or discolored towards the end of the flowering stage, your plant won’t be able to grow any replacements and you’ll be stuck with your burnt or discolored leaves until the end.

Leaves that are not green and healthy will absorb less light so it’s important to try to maintain plenty of green, healthy leaves in order to produce buds.

However, if you do experience some problems, don’t worry too much. As long as your buds remain intact, and you have enough leaves to get you to harvest, you will still produce amazing quality buds.

It's normal for leaves to start yellowing as harvest approachesAnd when you’re growing weed it’s TOTALLY normal to start getting yellow, beat-up looking leaves during the last few weeks of the flowering stage.

Because your plant is at its tallest/biggest during the flowering stage, it can be difficult to provide enough light to the whole plant during this stage, especially when growing indoors. This is a shame because the amount of buds you get in the end is directly proportional to the amount of light the plant receives during the flowering stage. This is why it’s so important you trained plants properly in the vegetative stage.

In the flowering stage, if any part of the plant’s green foliage appears dark or shadowed, then you know that the shadowy areas are not getting enough light. It’s important that leaves and bud sites are exposed to plenty of bright light to make sure buds grow as big as they can.

Buds that don’t get light do not grow much at all. Buds that are lower on the plant, or in the middle of the plant without much access to light and air will tend to stay small.

It is tough for many new growers to be patient and wait until their plant is ready to harvest.
Many new growers cut their cannabis down too early in excitement, which is a huge waste after spending so long caring for the plant. I completely understand though, I’ve been there.

You see your plant is growing buds and it can be tempting to want to harvest your buds as soon as possible. I urge you to be patient during this stage. A few weeks of growing could be the difference between getting a half-strength bud or getting a bud that is at full potency, so it is important to try to wait until just the right time to harvest.

 

Initial Growth Spurt (flowering “stretch)

When cannabis reaches the flowering (budding) stage, different strains tend to start growing more differently from each other.

When strains are well-matched, they will tend to stretch about the same amount as each other.

Some strains grow very tall after being switched to flowering, doubling or tripling their height (or more). Other strains stay short and squat after being switched to flowering, and may not stretch much at all.

What to expect for the “flowering stretch?”

A strain that is labeled…

Short – usually stretches less than double the height after switch to flowering stage
Average – may double in height after switch to flowering stage
Tall – may double or triple in height after switch to the flowering stage
As you enter flowering, the genetics begin to really show.

Let Me Show You: These plants were grown together. The one of the right starts out a bit taller, and grows just a little lankier than the other one. But generally they’ve stayed about the same height for the vegetative stage. Now look what happens when they get switched over to the flowering stage…

Mismatched Cannabis Strains Are Not Effective
at Using Indoor Grow Lights

Short vs tall cannabis strains - what this means as far as the flowering stretch
Always prepare for the Flowering Stretch!

Bud Growth (and how to increase yields)

You’ve already set things up with the strain you chose and the plant training you did in the vegetative stage.

Now it’s time to focus on what you can do to improve bud growth and yields in the flowering stage.

Girl Scout Cookies cannabis colaExpose Buds Sites: One thing that can help you get better yields is to expose your bud sites to more air and light. Some growers tuck leaves away, while other remove leaves that are covering buds sites. Try to get the buds as much light and air exposure as possible, but avoid damaging or over-stressing the plant.

Defoliation (removing leaves) is a highly controversial technique for growing cannabis. It’s important the new growers do not defoliate leaves until they’ve made it past their first harvest.

Though defoliation can help open up bud sites, it’s common for new growers to pull too many leaves, which will hurt yields later in the flowering stage. Cannabis uses leaves to make energy, and if it doesn’t have enough leaves it won’t be able to make enough energy to grow and fatten up buds.

Give Plenty of Light: Giving the maximum amount of brightness to your plants will improve your yields by giving your plant more energy to grow. It’s important not to go overboard though, as too much light can actually light-burn your plants.

The highest-yielding cannabis grow lights for the flowering stage are HPS grow lights. Many growers use an HPS grow light in the flowering stage to get bigger yields.

5 Ways to Increase Yields Indoors with Any Strain:
https://www.growweedeasy.com/5-tips-increase-yields-growing-indoors

Avoid Nutrients with Too Much Nitrogen During Budding: It’s important to switch to a flowering or “bloom” formula of nutrients during the cannabis flowering stage, which tend to be lower in nitrogen and higher in phosphorus. Nutrients made for the vegetative stage of growth contain too much nitrogen, which can hinder bud development. So avoid giving your plant a standard nutrient formula in the flowering stage, especially nutrients high in nitrogen (nitrogen is the first number listed on nutrient bottles).

Keep Nutrient Levels Low As You Approach Harvest: Many growers seem to get this idea that more nutrients = more buds. They might start ramping up on nutrients as harvest is coming, in an attempt to get bigger buds. This is not a great strategy.

While cannabis plants use a lot of nutrients in the first month following the switch to flower, your cannabis plants will slowly start needing less and less nutrients as they approach harvest. It can be a good idea to slowly start easing down on the amount of nutrients being provided about halfway through the flowering stage, just a little bit at a time.

Many growers also “flush” their plants by giving them just plain water for the last few weeks before harvest. By keeping nutrient levels relatively low during the second half of the flowering stage, you are preventing nutrient build-up in the plant that could possibly affect the taste of the buds, or prevent proper bud development. As long as your plant is not showing signs of nutrient deficiencies in the first month or two of flowering, you’re providing enough nutrients. Avoid supplements or bud ripening formulas that provide extra nutrients!

In magazines and online, flowering cannabis plants are almost always pictured 2-4 weeks before harvest. This is because leaves start dying and the plants stop looking as picture-perfect as harvest approaches. In the last 2-4 weeks before harvest, it’s normal for the plant leaves to slowly start dying away, just like the leaves of trees in the fall. This isn’t a sign to increase nutrients; it’s a natural part of the plant aging process, and buds will continue to ripen until harvest time.

Control Growing Environment: In the vegetative stage, cannabis plants tend to be able to thrive in many environments. In the flowering stage, plants start being a little more picky about the environment. What helps a lot with bud development is to control the temperature and humidity of the grow area. Most importantly, avoid too-hot temps! Too much heat can burn off terpenes, which reduces the taste/smell of your buds permanently. There’s also some evidence that too-high temps can actually burn off potency too. In the flowering stage, strive for temps that range from 65-80°F (18-26°C). It’s better to have slightly cooler temps at night than during the day, as long as the temperature stays in that range. Keep low humidity if you can because low humidity in the flowering stage reduces the chance of mold and increases trichome development.

Cannabis optimal temperatures

Harvest Buds at the Correct Time: Harvesting too early is one of the best ways to reduce your yields, and is a common mistake for new growers. Cannabis plants fatten their buds up considerably in the last few weeks before harvest, and this last-minute budding adds a lot of extra weight to your final yields.

When to Harvest

This section will teach you about harvest time; when are cannabis buds ready for harvest?

This is the Short Version – Read the Complete Tutorial on Choosing the Right Time to Harvest Here:
https://www.growweedeasy.com/harvest

The Science: Why do we harvest cannabis when we do?

If you ask people what the main ingredient in marijuana is, everyone says THC.

However, marijuana actually contains several different substances which produce the desired effects including something known as CBD. There is another well-known cannabinoid known as CBN.

How do THC, CBD & CBN relate to cannabis potency?
https://www.growweedeasy.com/thc-cbd-cbn-when-to-harvest-marijuana

When people talk about different effects from using different types of marijuana, they’re actually talking about variations in the plant chemistry and the ratio of these different substances to each other.

Harvesting a marijuana plant on the early side will tend to produce bud which gives you more of a buzzed, in-your-head experience. However, early-harvested buds give some people anxiety, as well as headaches.

Way too early to harvest – can give some people anxiety or headaches

Not ready for harvest - just about all of the white pistils are sticking straight outNot Ready to Harvest - Auto Mazar Cannabis

Harvesting a bit later will give your bud more of that stony, relaxed sort of feeling that makes your eyelids feel heavy.

If you harvest your plant after it’s already past the peak point of ripeness, than your bud will not be strong and will cause you to feel extra sleepy.

Thankfully, there is a relatively long window of time where cannabis can be harvested, depending on the strain.

Some growers harvest after only 2 months of flowering, while others wait as long as 4 months or more. The amount of time needed in the flowering stage before harvest is heavily dependent on strain and personal preference.

This cannabis bud is ready for harvest

More buds ready for Harvest

It’s important to pay attention to the cannabis while it’s growing, and also figure out what works for you. However, there are some general rules to follow.

Quick note before you harvest your plants: For better tasting buds, some people recommend changing how you feed your cannabis during the last two weeks before harvest, as follows…

Some people stop providing nutrients to their cannabis for the last two weeks before harvest in order to let the plant flush out any extra nutrient buildup or salts that may lead to a chemical nutrient taste.

Some growers also feed their marijuana plants one teaspoon of blackstrap molasses per gallon of water during the last two weeks to help produce bigger and tastier buds.

The molasses contains sugars to help bulk up your buds. Many of the “bud ripening” supplements on the market today are mostly made of sugar.

Even if you stop adding nutrients to your water for the last two weeks, you still want to pH your water so the plant can access any leftover nutrients that are still available in your growing medium.

Learn how to flush your cannabis before harvest for better quality buds

Flushing is Giving Plants Only Plain Water For Days or Weeks Before Harvest

Flushing your cannabis plants before harvest with plain pH'ed water can improve the quality and smoothness of your buds after harvest
When to Harvest Your Weed

There are several techniques to be able to look at your plant and tell if it’s ready to harvest.

One method to find out if your cannabis is ready for harvest is to look at the little white hairs (pistils) that have been growing out of your bud.

These little hairs are actually the pistils for the bud flowers (marijuana bud is actually just a bunch of little flowers called calyxes all clustered together).

When the hairs first appear, they are all white. As time goes on, with most cannabis strains the pistils start to curl in and darken.

The pistils of your growing cannabis plant can turn pink or purple!These hairs turn yellow, red, or brown, or even purple or pink, depending partially on the strain, and partially on growing conditions.

A general rule of thumb is to harvest when 50-75% of the hairs have changed color, though each strain is different, and that’s just a rough guideline. Some strains (for example White Widow) tend to stay mostly white even as they approach harvest.

No matter what, if it’s your first grow, you probably want to wait a few weeks longer than you expect. There will be lots of times where it seems like the cannabis buds are getting close to being done, then they will suddenly grow a whole bunch of new white pistils.

It’s hard to be patient and wait for the pistils to turn, but doing so will also result in much bigger yields since the buds have extra time to fatten up. And remember, if you harvest too early, your buds won’t be as potent.

While I like waiting until nearly all the pistils have turned, many others prefer to harvest sooner than that and they get great results too! You need to figure out what is optimal for you and your body.

Just remember that there is a 2-week range where marijuana can be harvested, so you do have a little wiggle room.

Quick and Dirty Method: Look at the Pistils

This method looks at the hairs (“pistils”) on a growing cannabis bud to try to determine harvest time. This method is not as exact as the trichome method explained below, but gives growers a way to start guessing when their buds might be ready, especially if they don’t have a magnifier available.

Wait until your buds have mostly stopped growing new, white hairs. By this point your buds should be fragrant (the whole grow room will likely smell like marijuana), plump and ‘filled out’
After new white hairs stop growing, wait until at least 40% of the white hairs have changed color (darkened) and are curling in. This marks the potential beginning of the harvest window. Buds harvested now are not yet at full potency, and will tend to have more of a speedy effect.
Harvest when 50-75% of the hairs have darkened for highest THC levels
Harvest when 80-90% of the hairs have darkened for more a couchlock, anti-anxiety effect (some of the THC has turned into the more relaxing CBN)
Much Too Young to Harvest

Cannabis bud is too young to harvest - immature buds have white hairs sticking straight out

Cannabis buds are not ready for harvest yet

Ready to Harvest

This cannabis is ready to harvest

A fat and heavy Wonder Woman cannabis cola - grown in hydroponic DWC tub under a 600W grow light

Though small, these buds are ready for harvest

This LED-grown bud is ready for harvest

Accurate Method: Look at the Trichomes

Just looking at the plants is not always precise enough especially when a plant is growing in an unexpected ways as you approach harvest time.

When you’re not familiar with your particular strain, or don’t want to risk guessing, you can use a magnifier to look closely at the trichomes to pick the perfect harvest time. In Europe these trichomes are called “resin glands.” Trichomes are the ‘crystals’ or ‘glitter’ you see accumulating on your bud/leaves during the flowering stage. These trichomes are what contain the majority of cannabinoids (the good stuff) in your buds, and they change in appearance as harvest time approaches.

Cannabis trichomes under a magnifier - still mostly clear trichomes - this plant has a while before the buds are ready to harvest

The cannabis trichome method is the most precise way of deciding when to harvest your cannabis plants. Growers can look at the glandular stalked trichomes on the buds under a magnifier, and this gives you the information you need to know the best time to harvest for your needs.

A bit of random trivia for you: These trichomes are supposed to taste bad to animals and deter them from eating the marijuana plant but many cats love the taste of these trichomes! You will notice that some cats will trick to lick or chew the leaves and buds of your flowering marijuana plant after they get a taste. Therefore if you have cats, make sure you keep them far away from your plants after they’ve started flowering!

The trichomes look like little mushrooms under a 30x-60x power, illuminated microscope. For harvest, you want to pay attention to the trichomes that look like the little mushrooms.

You’ll also see tiny, clear hair-like trichomes without the mushroom head, these aren’t important to potency so just ignore these ones.

Here’s a simple picture guide which breaks down when to harvest your weed based on the color of the trichomes.
(some strains trichomes turn purple or pink instead of amber/gold/yellow)

When to harvest cannabis based on the trichomes

Here’s videos showing trichomes of two of my cannabis plants just before harvest. In this case most of the trichomes are cloudy, with a few ambers here and there.

A digital microscope that takes video works even better than a jeweler’s loupe since you get a much clearer pic of the trichomes. These buds are ready to harvest.

We took these videos using the Carson zOrb hooked up to a laptop. So far this seems to be the most accurate way to look at trichomes (and you can make the picture big so you’re not squinting through a tiny jeweler’s loupe)

A Carson zOrb is a great way to get a video closeup of your trichomes

I was able to take this video using a digital magnifier that connects to my computer, but many growers use jeweler’s loupes and other types of magnifiers to see the trichomes.

Here’s some general rules about trichomes, hairs, and harvesting.

If white “hairs” are almost all sticking straight out and trichomes are all still translucent (clear) then your plant is too young and not ready for harvest. Harvesting now will result in low yield and non-potent harvests.
The beginning of the harvest window opens when your plant has stopped growing new white “hairs” or pistils and at least 40% of the white hairs have darkened and curled in.
Highest level of THC is when many/most of the trichomes have turned milky white / cloudy (when viewed under a magnifier). Trichomes that are milky have the highest levels of THC and contribute to a more euphoric ‘head high.’
The end of the harvest window is when the trichomes have become a darker color (usually amber/gold). The amber/yellow trichomes contribute to a ‘body high’ because some of the THC has converted into less psychoactive CBN, which has calming and anti-anxiety effects. With some strains the trichomes will even turn red or purple!
When trichomes start looking grey or withered, the harvest window has passed.
Due to this general principles, some people who want more of a ‘head high’ tend to harvest their buds earlier, such as when the trichomes are part clear/ part milky or mostly cloudy/milky.

For the “strongest” buds with the most psychoactive effects, harvest when nearly all trichomes are cloudy/milky.

For relaxing, more anti-anxiety buds, wait until some of the cloudy trichomes have darkened to amber.

When growing your own, I recommend sampling buds off your plant at different stages to get an idea what your preference is.

Don’t Harvest Too Early!

The hardest part of growing for many new growers is waiting for the right time to harvest.
There is a strong tendency to harvest the plant early due to excitement.

If you are feeling excited about harvesting your plant, then takes branches off the lower part of the plant that look the most done and dry them and check the potency for yourself.

Harvesting the buds in stages (starting off slowly with small batches) can really help abate the excitement.

Remember, 2 months is the minimum length of the flowering stage while your cannabis is growing buds. Some strains of cannabis need to be flowered for a solid 3-4 months or more before they’re ready for harvest.

Advice on using illuminated hand-held microscope: When using an illuminated microscope for the first time, my advice is to actually cut a piece of bud off the plant. You can try to look at the trichomes on the live plant but it can be a bit difficult.

If possible, put the piece of bud down on something stable such as a table. At that point, you want to take the microscope and push down relatively hard in a place where there are trichomes (on the bud is besst). Once the microscope is firmly pressed on the the plant, you can adjust the microscope focus to be able to see the trichomes.

As long as you keep the plant still and the microscope pressing down hard on the plant, you should be able to just twist the focus until all the trichomes just ‘pop’ into your vision. After a while, you get used to using the microscope and it gets easier.

A happy cannabis harvest

Trimming, Drying & Curing

You’ve mastered how to grow weed indoors, and you’re so close to the finish line, but at harvest you’re still not quite done. You still need to trim, dry and cure your buds before they will be ready to use.

You first cut down your plant to prepare it for the drying and curing processes.

“Curing” is the act of drying your buds slowly to preserve and enhance their taste and smell.

Curing technically starts when the plant stops getting water. From that moment on, your plant is drying and beginning the curing process. That means your plant is already beginning to cure while it’s being dried.

A proper dry/cure will get rid of the green/grassy smell of newly harvested buds, which can make them harsh, and allows the marijuana smell and taste to re-emerge.

Read the Complete Tutorial Here:
https://www.growweedeasy.com/curing

Drying: How to Trim & Dry Newly Harvested Cannabis

If you prepare your marijuana buds the proper way, you will ensure the smoothest, best-tasting result. I will describe a simple and easy, yet effective method below.

You can hang the entire plant but the drying process will go much faster if you cut off branches or individual buds from the plant and then hang up your pieces of bud to dry.

You will need to trim the leaves near the bud but remember that you can make edibles, hash oil or canna caps from the small leaves that grow close to the bud. While you should cut off these extra leaves during the trimming process, you don’t necessarily want to throw them away.

Drying cannabis plants in handSome growers choose to trim their buds before drying, and some trim their buds after they’ve already been dried. It is less convenient to trim buds after they’re dried, but it will slow down the drying speed if the leaves are left on during the drying process. Optimally want to dry your buds slow, so this may be a good technique if you live in a very dry climate.

I recommend always trimming buds BEFORE drying, unless you have a pressing reason not to. Trimming buds after drying is very difficult.

After you have cut off and trimmed your buds, you hang them upside down in a cool. dark place with plenty of ventilation so that they can dry out.

Make sure to space your buds evenly without touching each other so they can dry out properly without molding. Very humid air or too much moisture during the drying process is your enemy because it can cause mold.

60% humidity is optimal when buds are spread out and not touching each other, though most of us are at the mercy of our drying environments.

If you want to ensure a perfect dry/cure every time, follow this guide: https://www.growweedeasy.com/curing

You can use a humidifier or dehumidifier to adjust the humidity if you’re serious about drying your buds right. With a 60% level of humidity in the air, it will take several (4-10) days for your buds to finish drying all the way. At lower humidities, your drying will go much faster, so you need to watch buds closely and pull them down before they get overdried.

Drying as slowly as possible without mold will give you the highest quality buds, as this enhances the curing process.

Where to Hang Buds?

Basically you can hang buds upside down anywhere you want. This is a time to use your creative skills!

These cannabis plants have been hung to dry from closet hangers

An easy way to hang your buds to dry is pin them to coat hangers using clothes pins and simply hand the coat hangers in a closet.

You can also place them on mesh drying racks. These are a good choice for a humid environment, or if you plan on drying a lot of fresh bud together in a small space. By removing the buds from the stems and putting them on a mesh rack, they will dry a lot more quickly than if they were hung upside down with the buds still on the stems.

Buds are drying on a mesh rack
If you’re not sure where to hang your drying cannabis buds, a closet works great. The inside of your grow space or grow tent can also be a really nice choice.

A lot of growers hand their buds in their closets, or even across their living room on string.

Cannabis buds hanging in the living room

I personally hang my trimmed cannabis buds in my grow tent which was holding my now-harvested plants. A grow tent is a great place to dry cannabis, with a controlled environment and many places to hang bud.

Drying buds in your grow tent is simple, and lets you have more control over your environment

Curing: How to Cure Your Dried Cannabis Buds

Drying is the first part of the pot curing process. It’s important to take drying cannabis down at the right time to get the best results from curing.

When the buds still have moisture in the center, their stems will bend without breaking when you apply pressure to the stem. Once the plants are dried to the middle, the stems will begin to snap instead of bend.

Your marijuana buds are ready for the next stage of the curing process once the small stems snap, but the thicker ones don’t.

Check your drying buds several times a day – don’t let them get overdried!
Use your thumb to gently bend a few stems
Once the smaller stems “snap” when you bend them, it’s time to start the curing process.
At this point, the thicker stems should still be bendy, and won’t snap if you bend them. The bendiness means the bigger stems still contain moisture, which will be needed in the next part of the curing process.
You want to be careful of over-drying your weed, or buds will crumble when you try to break it up. If this happens, some growers recommend ways to re-moisten the buds with water and hang them to dry again, but this may not help. Cannabis bud seems to cure best if you dry it out slowly one time, and re-misting also means there is a greater opportunity for mold to grow.

Many people growing weed for the first time accidentally hurt their cure by drying their buds too fast. This is why it’s important to keep an eye on your buds closely during the curing process. When the buds are dried past a certain moisture level, they can no longer be “cured” anymore.

Read the Complete Curing Tutorial!

Step-by-step curing diagram & guide for harvesting cannabis

After the marijuana buds have dried, it’s time to cure the bud. This is done by placing the dried buds in quart-sized mason jars.

Cannabis buds should be cured in quart-sized mason jars

Buds that have not fully dried all the way are placed in mason jars to begin the curing process.

The curing process is a delicate dance of trying to maintain enough moisture to continue curing the buds, but not enough moisture to promote mold. You try to keep things just right.

You’re looking to keep the humidity around 60% in your jars during the curing process. A hygrometer will help.

Why Do We Need to Cure Marijuana Buds?

The purpose of curing is to improve the quality and taste of your buds before you smoke it.

Almost all marijuana enthusiasts agree that the best smell and flavor is obtained after the marijuana has been cured for some length of time.

Curing your buds for at least 2-4 weeks actually improves the apparent or perceived potency.

Yes, that’s right, curing buds in airtight jars for a few weeks actually makes buds feel “stronger” or more potent!

This may have to do with what happens to the cannabis terpenoids during the drying/curing process (terpenoids are produced by cannabis plants and affect the taste/smell of the bud – there’s some evidence they may also change/improve the potency of buds too) or it could be another chemical process entirely! But the important thing is it works.

However, curing for more than 6 months does not seem to continue to add much potency. I personally cure buds for 1-3 months. After that, I’m more concerned with long-term storage of the buds.

How to Cure Your Dried Buds: Step-By-Step
Cannabis buds cure perfectly in a quart-sized mason jar To cure your freshly dried buds, just put them in a tightly-closed jar in a cool dark place.
A quart-sized mason jar works great.

Each jar should be about 70-80% full after you’ve added the buds. Close the jars. You will be spending the next few weeks monitoring your buds in the jars, and in about 2 weeks, they will be ready for use!

The best cure will happen if you can keep a very close eye on your buds throughout the cure and allow them to finish drying as slowly as possible.

Hint: Use a Hygrometer To Track Moisture!  The easiest way to track the relative moisture content and ensure a perfect cure every time is to keep your curing buds in mason jars with a hygrometer inside. Learn more in the curing tutorial: https://www.growweedeasy.com/curing

So you’ve put your buds in jars. If buds ever feel wet during the curing process, it means you need to release extra moisture from the jar. It’s common for buds to feel wet 12-24 hours after being put in jars, but it’s okay.

During the first few weeks of curing, you will want to open the jars once a day for a couple of seconds to get fresh air in your jars and release any moisture that’s built up. Some moisture is still stored in the stems of your buds, even after buds seem mostly dry, and once you start curing the buds, any remaining moisture will spread out evenly through the plant and come to the surface. You know this has happened when you check on curing buds, and they seem like they’re moist again.

Whenever the outsides of buds feel wet, simply open the tops of your jars and allow the buds to be exposed to air until buds feel dry on the outside. It may take 10 minutes, or it may take a few hours depending on how wet the buds are. This will allow your buds to drying slowly, just enough to remove extra moisture trapped in the jar. There needs to be moisture for the curing process to continue, but buds should never be allowed to feel wet on the outside or they are more likely to be attacked by mold.

Many growers who don’t check buds often enough may end up growing mold and ruining their crop just before it’s ready. Yuck.

If you open the jar and it smells really funky (not a good funky), there may be hidden moisture in some of your buds which may not have dried completely and could be in the beginning stages of growing mold due to the moisture.

This especially tends to happen with big fat buds that were cut off the main cola. I generally recommend trashing any buds you suspect may have mold. Your health just isn’t worth it.

For the first 2 weeks of curing: Open your jars for a few seconds regularly. This can be done 1-3 times/day, but open all jars at least once each day.

From 2 weeks and on: Open jars at least once/week after that. If buds are wet or moist when you open the jars, then keep opening them every day until they have felt dry to the touch every day for at least a week.

Buds are usually considered “done” curing after 2-4 weeks, though many growers continue curing for longer. I usually let my buds cure for 3-6 months, as they seem to get more potent as time goes on.

It’s so important to regularly check on your  buds as they’re curing and drying, especially if you’re not monitoring the humidity, this process of “burping” the jars regularly actually helps curing happen more effectively..

I encourage you to keep your buds in their curing jars until you use them, but if you have a lot of buds, make sure you take out at least 3 weeks worth of bud at a time so you’re not constantly going in your jars and accidentally drying out your beautiful bud.

Some people only cure their bud for 1-2 weeks total while other cure their bud for 1-2 months or more. Because you need to open the jar regularly, you can always sample some as it’s curing to get a feel for whether it’s done or not.

Buds continue curing for up to 6 months. At that point, they will not gain any more benefits from further curing, and you should start thinking about long-term storage. For long term storage of cannabis buds, add fresh Boveda humidipaks to each quart-sized jar (bigger jars aren’t suitable for long-term storage), and place jars in a cool, dry place. Check on buds at least once/month.

Different people have different preferences, but luckily you can ‘test out’ your buds at any stage of curing, to figure out what works best for you.

 

Growing Tips & Hints
Here is a list of the cannabis growing hints and tips in this section:

Temperature
Humidity
Air Circulation
Smell Control
Stealth
Temperature
In general, cannabis plants enjoy temperatures in the same general range that humans like, perhaps a little warmer.

If a temperature is too hot or cold for a human to comfortable hang out in, it probably is too hot or too cold for your weed.

Depending on the type of grow lights used, the lights will probably raise the temperature of your grow space, which is something you should consider when creating your grow area.

Cannabis likes temperatures from about 70-85 degrees F (20-30 degrees C). Bigger and more powerful lights will raise the temperature more, and smaller grow areas will be more prone to temperature fluctuations due to the lights.

Optimal temperature for vegetative and flowering cannabis plants

Learn how to control temperature in the grow room: https://www.growweedeasy.com/temperature

 

 

Humidity
Regarding humidity, grow areas should not be particularly damp or dry.

Optimum humidity levels are from 40-60% though cannabis can stand a higher or lower humidity.

Cannabis kept in lower humidity conditions will drink more water, while cannabis in high humidity conditions will collect water through the leaves and drink less through the roots.

Cannabis tends to prefer a more humid environment – about 60% relative humidity – in the seedling, vegetative, and early flowering stages. However, towards the end of the florwering stage, cannabis will do better in a drier environment.

Excessive humidity at any stage can cause problems with mildew and mold (like the common, dreaded “white powdery mold.” Too-high humidity is anything above 60-70%. Some strains are especially prone to mold at high humidity.

On the flip side, extra dry air is often associated with finicky plants that get easily stressed for no reason, especially for younger marijuana plants.

Therefore if you have unexplainable problems with your plants, and you know your grow area is very dry or humid, try investing in a humidifier or dehumidifier.

You may be surprised how often fixing the humidity fixes mysterious marijuana plant problems.
Towards the last few weeks before harvest, it becomes essential to keep humidity lower in order to prevent mold, especially when there are huge, dense buds.

Many pro growers dramatically drop humidity with a dehumidifier during the last two weeks before harvest. This increases resin (THC) production and prepares the buds for drying/curing while preventing mold.

During the last two weeks before harvest, you can basically drop the humidity as low as possible.

A thermometer with a humidity sensor can be extremely useful in monitoring a grow area.

Learn everything you need to know about humidity:
https://www.growweedeasy.com/humidity-growing-cannabis

 

Air Circulation
Your Marijuana Plants Need Air!

Cannabis plants “breathe” CO2 like we breathe oxygen. They need a constant supply of CO2 (usually by giving the plant fresh air) to flourish.

In addition to your exhaust fan, it’s often a good idea to get a few smaller fans to blow air above and below your plant canopy.

This will help prevent hot spots, and gets fresh air and CO2 to all the plants in your grow space. Just make sure your fans aren’t strong enough to actually wave your plants around. Plants that are kept right in front of a fan may get “wind-burned” leaves, which is when leaves that have been waving around too much from the wind start curling and dying.

Read the ventilation & air circulation tutorial for growing cannabis

 

Smell Control
One of the most recognizable aspects of cannabis is its pungent, unique smell. Unfortunately, that same delightful smell is instantly recognizable, and can cause lots of trouble for growers.

Fortunately, smell control in the grow room is straightforward. There are two ways of stopping smells in the grow room. Either you find a way to “scrub” the smells out of the air, or you find a way to cover up the smell.

Learn about all your options for smell control here:
https://www.growweedeasy.com/how-to-control-smell-when-growing

 

Stealth
Your new mantra is… “No smell, no sell, no tell.”

There are a lot of ways to keep you and your grow safe, but this is the heart of it all.

No smell – No one should be able to smell your grow or smell cannabis on you. This makes you an easy target for police and marijuana haters!

No sell – Statistically, people who are growing strictly for personal use deal with far less legal troubles than people who sell their cannabis. This even applies in places like Colorado where it’s legal within the state!

No tell – Having fewer people know about your grow reduces the chances of you getting busted by law enforcement or burglarized by thieves. I know it’s hard to not show off your awesome growing skills, but this one secret that needs to stay a secret! Don’t tell ANYONE that you’re growing. It can be amazing how fast information can spread to a group once one person knows.

Don’t be this person!

Cannabis security failure!

Read the full stealth tutorial here:
https://www.growweedeasy.com/How-to-NOT-get-Caught-Growing-Weed

Growing Problems

Here’s a list of the common cannabis problems that will be covered in this section

Over or Underwatering
Too Tall Plants
Nutrient Deficiencies & Bugs
 

Over or Underwatering

Cannabis plants need just the right amount of water to grow and thrive.

When cannabis is given too much water too often, the roots don’t have access to air and will begin to “drown.” But things are just as bad when roots get too dry.

How do you know how often to water your plants?

Basically…

Water plants when soil feels dry up to your first knuckle
Make Sure Pots Have Enough Drainage
Bigger pots = water less often
Smaller pots = water more often
20-30% Extra Runoff Every Time You Water
This tutorial breaks down everything you need to know about watering cannabis: https://www.growweedeasy.com/how-often-water-marijuana

 

Too Tall Plants

Too tall plants are usually caused by 3 things

Not enough light
Genetics
Improper plant training
I commonly see new growers with tall, stretched seedlings. Too-tall seedlings is almost always caused when the plant is not getting enough light. In that case, move lights closer or get a more powerful grow light.

Genetics can have a powerful effect on plant size and growing habits. This is why it’s important to learn about your strains (if you can) before you grow them. It will help you know what to expect. Learn more about picking the right strain here: https://www.growweedeasy.com/training#choose-strain

However, many growers end up with too-tall plants because they didn’t properly apply plant training techniques like LST, supercropping, ScrOG, topping, FIMing, and more. Learn about plant training techniques here: https://www.growweedeasy.com/training

 

Nutrient Deficiencies & Bugs

As long as you’re providing your plant with the right type of nutrients and are managing pH, it’s unlikely that you will run into real deficiencies.

If you’re having problems that you think might be a deficiency, the first step is to look at this 7-step checklist to fixing 99% of cannabis growing problems:
https://www.growweedeasy.com/7-step-cure

If you’re still not sure, take a look at this comprehensive list of cannabis plant problems, bugs and deficiencies.

A Complete Overview Of Growing Cannabis Indoors
Growing cannabis indoors can seem daunting, but once you've developed the skills, you may never go back outside! With the right knowledge and equipment, even rookie growers can achieve great harvests at home. Explore our overview on indoor growing to prepare yourself for the process.

“Dude, I should grow my own weed!”

If you love cannabis, chances are you’ve caught yourself saying or thinking that on at least one or two occasions. Well, if you’re finally ready to get your hands dirty and dive into the rich world of cannabis cultivation, you’re in luck.

Below, you’ll find a complete walkthrough of all the basic concepts involved with growing great weed indoors.

WHY GROW CANNABIS INDOORS?
Growing cannabis indoors has a lot of advantages:

• Year-round harvests
• Consistency in crop
• Control over the growing environment
• Control over flowering (for photoperiod strains)
• Privacy
• Fewer pests

WHAT TOOLS AND EQUIPMENT DO YOU NEED TO GROW CANNABIS INDOORS?
To grow great weed indoors, you’re going to need the following:

DESIGNATED GROW SPACE

This can be a spare room, a DIY tent, a broom cupboard, a refurbished piece of furniture, or even an old fridge!

THERMOMETER/HYGROMETER

You’ll use these to help track the temperature and humidity of your grow space.	
SCISSORS AND SHEARS

Trimming, training, and manipulating cannabis strains can really help them flourish and produce bigger, denser, and more potent flowers.	
PH AND PPM METERS

These tools will help you track the pH and electrical conductivity of your medium to ensure your plants can access all the nutrients you’re feeding them.	
LUX METER

Cannabis plants love light, and lux meters help you measure and optimise the light in your grow room.	
TIMERS

To automate the light cycle.	
STRING

To tie down your plants for training. You’ll want to use appropriate gardening wire or something similar to avoid damaging your plants.	
BUCKETS/MEASURING CUP

To measure out your nutrients.	
JEWELLER'S LOUPE

To inspect the trichomes of your plants as they flower, and to inspect the foliage for any pests or other issues.	
GARDEN STAKES

To support heavy branches during flowering.	
NUTRIENTS

These can come in several forms, but your plants will require sufficient nutrients to churn out a productive harvest.	
CONTAINERS

11-litre white plastic pots tend to be the norm among most indoor growers. However, fabric pots and other smart pots can also be used. You can fit around nine 11-litre pots per m².	
SEEDLING STARTER KIT

Our Starter Kits come with feminized or autoflowering seeds and a propagator, making it easy to create the perfect environment for your seedlings.	
CHOOSING THE BEST PLACE TO GROW CANNABIS INDOORS
Growers have plenty of choices when it comes to setting up their growing area. Check out the best places to start your grow—and the benefits of each—below.

BASEMENT
Situated underground, basements provide a concealed safe haven for cultivating cannabis. They are usually void of windows, meaning they are free of light leaks—and thus ideal for photoperiod growers. Basements are also usually relatively large and provide more than enough room to obtain a heavy crop. You’ll also find your basement maintains a fairly even temperature all year round—they are easy to regulate using the same automated settings no matter the season.

Most basements have ventilation shafts to carry stagnant air outside. Be mindful of where this shaft ends—you don’t want to send a plume of terpenes towards your neighbour's windows. A good-quality carbon scrubber will remove the suspicious scent if you’re faced with this challenge.

GARAGE
Unless you use it to store your car, chances are your garage just holds random items and gardening equipment. Garages are usually cool in the summer and relatively warm in the winter, making them super easy to regulate. Grow tents also look a lot more innocent in a garage, opposed to standing tall and suspect in your bedroom or living room.

Garages usually aren’t as well insulated as the rest of the house. Be sure to cover up any gaps and drafts that might spread the smell of your crop down the street. If you’re not using a grow tent, black out any windows—the sight of bright pink and blue LEDs will surely arouse suspicion if not covered up.

RELATED STORY
The Cost Of Growing Cannabis Indoors, And How To Control It
ATTIC
An attic serves as one of the safest places to grow cannabis. Guests have no reason to enter, and most are only accessible using a step ladder. Most attics are also entirely blacked out and won’t leak light (which has the potential to revert your plants back to the vegetative phase).

Chances are your attic won’t have any power outlets, and running an extension cord up there might look out of place, so consider installing some outlets for increased stealth and ease. Unless you’re using LED lights, it’s also a good idea to run some fans to keep the room cool.

GROW BOX
You can grow cannabis literally anywhere in your house by building a grow box. With a few basic materials such as some PVC pipe, duct tape, a hand saw, a good light, and a fan, you’ll have everything you need to create your own custom grow box. You can modify the size of a grow box to fit flush with any corner within your house.

CHOOSING THE BEST PLACE TO GROW CANNABIS INDOORS

CLOSET OR TINY SPACE
Don't worry if you don’t have an attic, garage, or basement available. You can still achieve great yields in surprisingly small spaces. Use the principle of micro-growing to grow compact plants suitable for small converted cupboards, boxes, and buckets.

BUILD A GROW ROOM
Have space, time, and resources to build your very own grow room? If so, we highly recommend it! As opposed to growing in a tent or small box, you can construct a sturdy, closed-off room dedicated to cannabis, made out of wood, PVC, and the like. From here, the structure needs to be outfitted with lights, ventilation, etc. before it's ready to grow you some superior cannabis.

RELATED STORY
How To Build Your Own Cannabis Grow Room
OPTIMISE YOUR GROWING ENVIRONMENT
Wherever you plan to grow, make sure to keep the following variables in mind when preparing your grow space:

• Smell: Newsflash—flowering cannabis plants really smell! If you’re worried about people knowing about your plants, make sure to invest in a carbon-filtered airflow system.

• Sound: Ballasts, fans, and extractors all make noise while they're running. If you're worried about keeping your grow-op secret, invest in quality fans and extractors, and seal-off your grow room.

• Ventilation: Stagnant air is a real problem for indoor cannabis growers as it can drive up the temperature and humidity levels in the grow room, which can in turn attract pests, moulds, and all sorts of other problems.

• CO₂: Supplementing CO₂ levels in your grow room during bloom can have a beneficial impact on the size and quality of your yield. If you have the budget, consider investing in a CO₂ generator to help your plants produce the best possible product.

• Lighting: There are countless different grow lights on the market, and knowing which brand/model is worth your money can be tricky as a beginner. HPS lights are arguably the most common on the market, although LED lights are growing increasingly popular. You’ll need to make sure there’s sufficient space between the canopy and your lights to avoid burning your plants. In super small spaces, consider lighting your grow from the side.

Growing Cannabis Indoors
CHOOSING A GROWING MEDIUM
There are generally two different methods/mediums you can use to grow cannabis indoors:

• Soil: Growing in soil is arguably the easiest way to cultivate weed, especially for beginners. Either invest in a quality ready-made soil or try your hand at creating your very own cannabis super soil.

• Hydroponics: Hydroponics uses water or soilless substrates such as peat, coco coir or some other mix of inert substances as the main growing medium. Plants are fed water-soluble nutrients directly via the roots. This gives the grower a lot more control over the nutrient intake of their plants as there is no soil to buffer the feed. For experienced growers, this added level of control can result in bigger, better harvests as their plants are able to take up more nutrients, faster.

UNDERSTANDING THE BASICS OF CULTIVATING CANNABIS INDOORS
Now that we’ve covered the basics of setting up a grow tent and the equipment you’ll need to invest in, it’s time to look at some of the basics of actually growing cannabis.

Below is a general overview of what to expect when growing weed indoors. This includes the process of selecting genetics, regulating temperature and humidity, germinating seeds, vegging, flowering, harvest, and more.

RELATED STORY
How To Choose A Strain When Growing Indoors
CHOOSING THE RIGHT STRAIN
There are countless cannabis strains on the market, and breeders put a lot of thought, time, and resources into constantly refining and creating new varieties of this age-old plant. So, as a beginner, how do you know whether you should be growing Blueberry or Super Silver Haze?

In general, we recommend indica-dominant strains for beginner growers. They flower faster, are more compact, and still produce spectacular results. While we also love sativas, their height and flowering time can make them a bit more challenging to handle, especially if you haven’t got many harvests under your belt, or many resources to boot.

If you can’t settle on a single strain, it’s perfectly fine to grow multiple cannabis varieties in the same tent or room. Just keep in mind that you’ll be dealing with plants of different heights and harvest times, which can be challenging if you’re not very experienced.

GERMINATING YOUR CANNABIS SEEDS
There are a number of ways to germinate cannabis seeds. Most growers, however, wrap their seeds in some moist paper towel and keep them in a dark cupboard for 2–3 days until the seeds split.

For the best results when germinating seeds, use one of our Starter Kits. Complete with a propagator, Easy Start seedling pods, and three seeds (feminized or auto), these kits make germinating and growing healthy seedlings super easy. Seedlings like high humidity levels (65–70%) and temperatures of 20–25°C.


MAINTAINING OPTIMAL TEMPERATURE AND HUMIDITY
Like any other plant, cannabis thrives in specific environmental conditions. Temperature and humidity are arguably the biggest external factors influencing the health and growth of your plants.

During veg, daytime (or lights-on) temperatures should be kept between 22–28°C, while relative humidity should sit between 40–70%. Sativa strains can tolerate slightly warmer, more humid conditions than indicas. Lights-off temperatures during veg should sit between 18–23°C.

During flowering, you’ll want your room temperature to sit between 20–26°C. Your humidity shouldn’t exceed 50% to avoid bud rot and other fungal issues during this critical time. In the last 2 weeks of flowering (as you flush your plants), consider dropping your temperatures even further to 18–24°C, with humidity levels of 30–40%.

Easy Combo Booster Pack
Easy Combo Booster Pack
 4.5/5 (193)
Buy Easy Combo Booster Pack
THE VEGETATIVE PHASE
Cannabis plants enter the vegetative phase roughly 2 weeks post-germination. How long you let your (photoperiod) plants veg for is up to you; most growers, however, flip their plants to flowering after 4 weeks to prevent them from becoming too big.

As your plants veg, they’ll want plenty of nitrogen and potassium to develop healthy foliage and strong roots. A common NPK schedule for vegging plants is:

• 4:2:3 during week 1 of veg
• 10:5:7 during weeks 2 and 3
• 7:7:7 during week 4

The vegetative phase is also when you’ll want to use any training methods like LST, ScrOG, or defoliation to help control the shape of your plants and improve their access to light. Once you’re happy with how your plants look, you’ll be ready to change their light cycle and transition them over to the flowering phase.

RELATED STORY
The Growth or Veg phase
THE FLOWERING PHASE
The flowering phase is an exciting time for growers. For the first couple weeks of this phase, your plants will go through a period of accelerated growth or “stretch”. By the second week of flowering, your plants should display their sex (keep an eye out for male pollen sacs to avoid pollination) and begin developing their flowers. How long a plant takes to reach maturity varies among strains; some indicas are ready to harvest in 7–8 weeks, while some sativas can take over 12 weeks to reach maturity.

During flowering, you’ll want to feed your plants more phosphorus to support the growth and density of their flowers. Again, each grower has their own way of feeding their plants, but a common NPK schedule might look like:

• 5:10:7 during early flowering (weeks 1 and 2)
• 6:15:10 during mid-flowering (weeks 3 and 4)
• 4:10:7 during late flowering (weeks 5 and 6)

During this stage, you can’t transplant or do much training to your plants. Some light defoliation is okay, but any major stress you inflict at this point will just interfere with their ability to produce flowers.

RELATED STORY
The blooming phase
FLUSHING AND HARVESTING
Flushing is a super important step in preparing for harvest. It involves cutting off all nutrients and administering only pH-controlled water for the last 1–2 weeks before harvest. This forces the plant to use up any nutrients, resulting in a cleaner, better-tasting smoke.

As you flush your plants each day, keep a close eye on their trichomes using your jeweller’s loupe. You’ll know your plants are ready to harvest when around 70% of the trichomes are cloudy, with the rest being a light amber brown.

For a constant supply of great bud, you can use the perpetual harvest method; this involves keeping two grow rooms, one for vegging and one for blooming, and moving new plants into bloom right after harvesting a set of flowering plants. While it can seem daunting, it’s the perfect way to never go without bud.

REMEMBER: ALWAYS KEEP THINGS CLEAN!
Congratulations! You’ve just harvested your first batch of home-grown indoor Kush. Now, just remember to clean your grow room, and you’ll be ready to sow your next batch of seeds. In the grow-op, cleanliness is next to godliness, and ensures your product always turns out the best it can be!

Best Way To Grow Weed Indoors (KISS: Keep It Simple, Stupid)
Last updated July 16, 2021 By Steven 19 Comments

how best to grow cannabis indoorsThe best place to grow cannabis is indoors.

You have complete control over everything when growing weed indoors, which allows you to really maximize rapid growth and huge yields with incredible potency.

But to get the perfect buds, you need the perfect environment.

The good news is: even if you make mistakes and don’t provide the perfect environment, you will still be harvesting buds. Marijuana is very resilient.

That said, the more things you get right, the better the result.

If you follow the instructions here, you will get all the basics right, while still keeping everything as simple as possible. To me, this is the best balance between great results and not over-complicating things to the point where it becomes stressful and no fun.

So let’s get started, by going through the whole growing process step by step, beginning with the preparation and ending with harvest.

Contents [hide]

1 Indoor Marijuana Growing
1.1 1. Find A Grow Space
1.2 2. Get Pots And Soil
1.3 4. Add A Grow Light
1.4 5. Ventilation
1.5 7. What Else Do You Need For The Growing Process?
1.6 8. Start Growing Cannabis Indoors
1.6.1 The Best Places To Get Cannabis Seeds
1.6.2 Germinating Your Cannabis Seeds
1.6.3 Vegging Your Cannabis Plants
1.6.4 Flowering Your Weed Plants
1.6.5 Harvesting Your Weed Plants
2 Best Way To Grow Weed Indoors: Final Thoughts
 

Indoor Marijuana Growing

A basic setup for growing weed indoors. It has: pots, a grow light, fan and filter ventilation, and an oscillating fan for air circulation, all inside a grow tent.

 

1. Find A Grow Space
The first thing you need to do is figure out where you will grow your cannabis plants. Are you setting up in the basement, in a closet, etc?

Once you have the space, you want to get it ready for growing marijuana indoors. The easiest way to do this is to get a grow tent. You can find tons of inexpensive tents on Amazon and these cheap tents are good enough for most of us.

Check them out here and just pick one that fits into your grow space and has enough room inside to fit your planned number of plants. If you need especially small grow tents, those can be a bit harder to find. Our article on mini grow tents will help.

 

2. Get Pots And Soil
Sure, you can grow hydroponically or in a soil-less growing medium without using hydroponics, but in my quest to keep it simple, I recommend growing indoors with soil. It’s easy to find and easy to use.

Any good quality potting soil will work, but avoid anything with artificial extended release fertilizer or that otherwise contains chemicals. Miracle Gro is a good example of a soil to avoid.

The  Ocean Forest Potting Soil from Fox Farm is a great option. It contains a lot of nutrients, so you won’t need to any any for the first week or so. If you keep re-potting the cannabis plant, you may never have to add any.

pot and soil for weed
If you start your seedlings in this soil (which I do recommend for simplicity), they will suffer some nutrient burn at first. This is not a huge deal, but you can avoid it if you like, by putting some less nutrient-rich soil on top of the Ocean Forest soil for your seedlings.

When it comes to pots, I recommend the fabric variety. They are by far the best option for growing cannabis.

These pots from Vivosun are great.

If you want to use pots you already have, that works fine, too. Just make sure whatever container you use has some holes in the bottom for drainage. If you use a regular bucket, for example, make sure to drill a few holes in the bottom.

When it comes to pot sizes, you’ll want a small pot (1 gallon or less) for seedlings, but you can also just use a plastic cup. After that, you want to transplant the plants into ever larger pots.


Once their roots have expanded throughout their new pot, it’s time to give them a larger one so they have room for growth. An easy way to tell they are ready to move is when the roots start coming out the drainage holes in the bottom of the pot.

At some point, you want to stop giving them larger pots, to keep them from growing ever larger. A good rule of thumb for the largest pot size is this: you need about 2 gallons of container per 12″ in plant height.

Thus, if you want your plants to reach a height of 3 feet, you would need a 6 gallon pot. If you are using fabric pots (as I recommend) go twice as big. In this example, get a 12 gallon pot (or at least 10).

The reason fabric pots should be bigger is that the soil dries out much faster in a smart pot. Making the pot larger, increases the time it takes for the soil in the middle to dry out.

 

4. Add A Grow Light
There are ton of options for grow lights, but we’re keeping it simple. Just get an LED grow light. They cost less to operate and they’re easier to use. Nowadays, they actually cost the same or less than an equivalent HID system, once you account for all the equipment you need to run HID grow lights.

indoor grow lights for weed
Check out my roundup of the best 300w LED grow lights to see what I mean.

Those lights will work great for a grow of one weed plant. If you have a bit of a larger grow space, I highly recommend these Spider Farmer lights. They are the best value lights on the market right now and work great for growing cannabis plants.

Spider Farmer only makes lights in four sizes, though. If you need a different wattage, check out the Phlizon COB lights. They are also excellent grow lights and actually cost even less than the Spider Farmer fixtures. Plus, they use COBs, which some still prefer, despite the industry moving more to quantum board lights like those from spider Farmer.

 

5. Ventilation
Weed plants love fresh air. They achieve the best growth when they get a slight breeze. It also serves to prevent mold. The best way to give your plants the breeze they need is with a fan on the lowest setting. You can also remove larger leaves or lollipop your plants to improve air flow.

There is no need to spend a lot of money on a specialized “grow tent” fan. You can basically use any fan you may already have. If you don’t have one, you can buy them anywhere.

If you need a recommendation, we reviewed the best fans here.

It is small and comes with both a clip and a stand. That means you can clip one to the tent pole above the canopy and have a second one standing on the ground, blowing fresh air below the canopy. It does not oscillate, but that is not really necessary in a smaller grow tent or grow space.


You’ll also need to draw hot air out of the tent and replace it with cool air. This means you’ll need an exhaust fan, at the very least. You may also need an intake fan. This article helps you figure out your cooling needs.

 

7. What Else Do You Need For The Growing Process?
Since we’re keeping the process simple, I’ll leave it at the bare necessities. If you’ve only got a cannabis plant or two, you’ll be fine with that.

I do recommend a few additional things, though.

Check out this article for a complete list of everything I recommend.

The most important additional items for ideal growth are: a nutrient solution, a pH meter or pH strips, and pH up and down solutions.

If you only have a plant or two, you can get by with just the fan for ventilation. You’ll just have to leave the tent door open at times to replace the air inside.

And you can get by without a charcoal filter to remove the odor as well. Ideally though, you want to ventilate your tent and you want to remove the odor from any air you ventilate out.

 

8. Start Growing Cannabis Indoors

Graphic: The basics of growing weed.
Now that you have all your equipment gathered, it’s time to start growing cannabis. Well, there is one more thing you need. The most important of all. The actual cannabis plants.

 

The Best Places To Get Cannabis Seeds
If you know someone who is growing marijuana plants and can hook you up with seeds or clones, lucky you! You can skip this section. If you have clones, head here to learn how to get clones to root faster.

If not, your best bet is to buy seeds online from a seed bank. Most people prefer to buy from a bank located outside the US, though this really doesn’t matter much anymore.

cannabis seeds
The thinking is that having seeds sent across state lines could get you in trouble, since growing marijuana is a federal crime. But it is highly unlikely that anything will happen. In the highly unlikely event that your seeds are discovered, they will most likely only get confiscated.


But if you buy from outside the country, the worst that will happen is that they are confiscated at customs. That’s it. You don’t even get put on a list. Then you just contact the seed bank and they will send you a replacement shipment (if it’s a good seed bank).

These days, however, this is basically the same thing that happens when you ship inside the US. That is why our favorite online seed banks are both headquartered in Europe, but they have warehouses in the US. This cuts down on shipping times considerably.

Our favorite bank to buy from is I Love Growing Marijuana. They are based in Amsterdam, but they have a distribution center in the California. As mentioned, this cuts down on shipping times. Their seeds are high quality and they even have their own unique strains.

The biggest plus is their germination guarantee. If your seeds do not germinate, they will replace or refund them. The primary drawback is that they currently only ship to the US or Australia. If you do not live in either of those locations, read the next paragraph.

Crop King Seeds is another great option, especially if you are not in the US or Australia. They are headquartered in Vancouver, Canada and they actually have physical stores in Canada as well. They ship anywhere in the world.

For the US, we prefer ILGM, due to their germination guarantee and the free shipping. Crop King has a guarantee, too, but they only guarantee that 80% of the seeds will germinate. They also charge for shipping, with rates in the US being the lowest at $20 and international rates as high as $40.

You can read more about ILGM here and about Crop King Seeds here.

I would always spend a bit more and buy feminized seeds.

Only the female cannabis plants make buds that can be smoked. Buying feminized cannabis seeds saves you the trouble of identifying and removing male plants later on during the flowering stage. It also means you don’t waste time of seeding and vegging male plants, only to have to eliminate them.

I know many beginning indoor cannabis growers want to spend as little as possible, so they start by growing bag seed. I did this myself, so I won’t tell you not to, but you should be aware of the problems you may face.

This article covers all the possible issues and also guides you in maximizing your chance of success if you want to grow weed with bag seed.

 

Germinating Your Cannabis Seeds
The easiest way to germinate seeds of marijuana plants is to use a starter cube (or seedling plug). Rapid Rooters are great. You can find them here on Amazon. There is even a version that comes with a tray.

You simply put the seed inside, keep it warm and slightly moist and when the sprouts and root appear after a few days, put the whole plug, seed and all, into the soil in your seedling pot. That way you also don’t have to worry about handling the delicate seeds once they have sprouted.

If you don’t want to bother with the Rapid Rooters, you could also just germinate your seeds in the same container that you plan on using for your young seedlings. It could be a plastic cup or a 1-gallon fabric pot or whatever.


seedling growing
To do this, plant them the cannabis seeds about 1/2 to 1 inch deep (1.3 to 2.5 cm). The soil should be moist, but not soaking.

Keep it that way during the entire germination process by adding water whenever it begins to dry out. You also want to keep the seeds warm, either with a heating pad or with a light that gives off some heat.

If you are using the Ocean Forest potting soil, you might want to mix it with a lighter potting soil for the seedling pot.

If not, the seedling will suffer some nutrient burn, but it is not really that serious. I’d probably mix it, to avoid the nutrient burn, but it will not cause permanent damage to your plants.

Try to keep the temperature during seeding around 73° F (23° C) and the humidity around 70%. Give them 18 hours of light per day, followed by 6 hours of darkness.

You don’t need a powerful LED grow light during this stage, but you can use it. Just hang it higher, to keep from harming the delicate seedlings.

Many growers prefer using a weaker light for seedlings to save on power costs. If you have a lot of seedlings, a T5 light fixture is best. I prefer T5 LED lights. If you prefer fluorescent, you’ll find the best options here.

If you’ve only got a few, a CFL bulb will work just fine. This article tells you what you need.

Once your marijuana plant grows its first set of regular leaves (i.e. not the seedling leaves), it has officially entered the vegetative stage.

 

Vegging Your Cannabis Plants
The vegetative stage is when your marijuana grow starts to get exciting. The plants grow fast, but do not yet produce any buds or flower. The great thing about growing marijuana indoors is that you get to control everything, meaning you can provide the ideal conditions for maximum yields.

vegging marijuana
The first and most important thing you have control over is lighting. During vegging, you want to keep your grow lights on for at least 18 hours per day.

Some growers like to give a full 24 hours of light, but I recommend going with a schedule of 18 hours on and 6 hours off.

You also control the air temperature and humidity. For vegging you want the keep the grow area between 70 and 85° F (20 and 30°C), with a relative humidity of 40 to 60% (I’d stay over 50%).

If you don’t have a thermometer or humidity monitor, don’t worry too much. As long a your cannabis plants are not freezing or scorching, they will grow. Keeping the environment in the ideal range just means faster and better growth.

Make sure you water your plants regularly. Whenever the top inch of soil feels dry to the touch, give them more water. Water them until you see around 20% extra runoff water come out of the bottom of the pot. Be careful not to water too often. Always wait until the top one inch of soil is dry.

If you use a nutrient rich soil, your plants will be getting a good amount of nutrients, at least for a while. Eventually, you will need to provide more, by adding them to your plants’ water.

Begin by adding half the amount indicated on the nutrient schedule that came with your nutrients. If plants are growing rapidly and need more nutrients, up the dosage to 3/4 of the indicated amount.

I highly recommend training your plants during vegging.

Left on their own, they will grow tall and end up in a Christmas tree shape. This is not ideal, because it means one large bud at the top and not much else.

You want your plants to grow short and fat, with multiple peaks that are all about the same height. That way, each peak gets the same amount of light and grows the same large bud.

There are a number of ways to achieve this. I prefer bending the young main stem downward and tying it down, forcing it to grow horizontally. Then multiple other stems will grow upward from it. You can find much more on training your plants here.

Whenever your plants grow too large for their pots, but you want them to keep growing, you need to repot them.

If you fill the new pot with fresh soil (assuming you are using a nutrient rich soil), remember to stop adding nutrients to the water until the plants have used up the nutrients in the soil (about a week).

How long should cannabis plants stay in vegging?
This is entirely up to you. You can keep them in this stage indefinitely, if you like. This is actually what growers will do with a female plant, if they use her for quality clones.

When you should take your plants from vegging to flowering depends on how large you want them to get. An average strain will double in size during flowering, so you want to take it out of vegging when it is about half the size you would like it to end up having.

This does depend on the strains, though. If the strain is labeled as short, you can expect it to not double in size during flowering. If it is labeled as tall, you can expect it to more than double in size.

 

Flowering Your Weed Plants
flowering cannabis
To get your plants to enter the flowering stage, simply adjust the amount of light they get every day. Change the lighting schedule to 12 hours on and 12 hours off and your plants will begin to flower.

Marijuana plants also need a lot more light during bloom, so you want to make sure you give them what they need. Powerful LED grow lights are best, but I also highly recommend CMH lights.

HPS works well too, as it always has, but I don’t recommend it anymore, since LED and CMH are better. Assuming quality LED grow lights, of course.

During flowering, plants become more sensitive to humidity, so you want to keep it lower to prevent mold.

Keep the temperature between 65 and 80° F (18 and 26° C) and maintain a relative humidity between 40 and 50% during the beginning of the flowering stage and 40 and 45% during the final weeks.

male or female weed plantA week or two weeks after you switch to the flowering light schedule, you can finally see the gender of your plants. If you used feminized seeds, they will all be female and you have nothing to worry about.

If you used non-feminized seeds, you can expect about half of your plants to be male. Now that you can identify the males, you need to remove them from your grow room and get rid of them immediately. If they pollinate the females, you end up with buds full of seeds.

You can tell the difference by the pre-flowers they grow at the tops of branch joints (the “V” where  the stems meet the trunk):

Female plants start growing longer and thinner pre-flowers that are often fat on the bottom. Eventually, wispy white hairs emerge from the top.
Male plants start growing balls/pollen sacs that have no white hairs or pistils. You can get a lot of them, which looks like a bunch of small grapes.
Sometimes the male and female growths look very similar, but if you see white hairs, it is female.

Even after removing the males, you should keep a close eye on the females. It is possible for them to become hermaphrodites, which usually happens if they are stressed. If that happens, you can try removing only the section of the plant that has begun forming male parts, but I recommend removing the entire plant, just to be safe.

If you don’t want to destroy it, you can continue to grow it separately from your other plants. That way you don’t loose the harvest (though it will be full of seeds), but the hermie plant also can’t pollinate the rest of your females.

The other important task during flowering is to make sure your buds are all getting sufficient light. If you see a bud in the shadows, try to get it light so that it can grow and give you extra yield.

The best way to do this is with supplemental lighting. Another reason to add supplemental lighting is if your primary fixture is not heavy in red spectrum light. In that case, some smaller all-red LED lights would really help boost yields.

Some growers will use scissors to trim off large fan leaves that are blocking light. I would caution against this for your first grow, since those fan leaves are what turn light into energy. If you remove too many fan leaves, your buds don’t get the energy they need to grow big.

Instead, you can try tucking away some of the fan leaves, if they are impeding the light and causing shadows on your buds.

When is comes to actual nutrition, cannabis plants need much less nitrogen during flowering. If you bought a nutrient set made specifically for cannabis, it will contain a ‘bloom’ or ‘flower’ bottle. Switch to that one now, since it contains the right mix for flowering.

For the first month of flowering, your marijuana plants need a lot of nutrients. After that, they need less and less. Reduce the nutrients you give them gradually, starting around the halfway mark of flowering.

During the last two weeks before harvest, it is a good idea to flush your plants. This means you should give them plain water, with no nutrients. This ensures that the nutrients do not impart a flavor on the buds.

Your plants will look like they are slowly dying during this time period. That’s because they are. As the near harvest time, they will look pretty rough, because they stop taking in nutrients and everything they have is funneled into bud growth.

This is normal, so do not panic and give them more nutrients. They do not need them and the nutrients will only harm the flavor of your bud.

Many growers even stop watering altogether during the last 3 days to one week before harvest. When to stop watering before harvest depends on the strain, but anytime within that range will have positive benefits on bud size and potency.

In general, the flowering stage lasts a minimum of 2 months (or 8 weeks) and some strains of cannabis need to be flowered for 3 to 4 months. Then it is time to harvest.

 

Harvesting Your Weed Plants
harvest time marijuana
How do you know when to harvest?

It depends a lot on what you want.

Harvesting a bit early results in buds that give you a buzzed, heady experience. They cause anxiety and headaches in some people.

If you harvest later, you get more of a stony, relaxing bud. Harvesting very late results in weak bud that makes you extra-sleepy (why would anyone want this?).

The good news is: there is a fairly large window of time for when you can harvest your bud. Everything really depends on the strain and your personal preference. Just make sure you don’t harvest too early. That is the biggest mistake people make, so you can usually wait longer than you think you should.

There are two main methods for determining when to harvest. The first is easy, but less accurate. The second requires a magnifier.

Method 1: Check the Pistils
The quick way to determine when to harvest is to look at the little white hairs that grow out of your bud. These are the pistils and eventually they start to curl inward and darken. They can turn any number of colors: red, yellow, purple, pink, brown, etc.

To know when it is harvest time, you first need to wait until your buds stop growing new hairs. This is where many inexperienced growers jump the gun. Make sure they are done growing white hairs, because sometimes they just pause for a bit, then grow more.

Once new white hairs have stopped growing, wait until 40% of them have darkened at least. 40% is the beginning of your harvest window, but you should wait longer.

Harvest when 50 to 75% of the hairs have darkened for maximum THC levels. Wait until 80 to 90 % have darkened for some of the THC to turn into CBN, which is more relaxing and gives you that “fuse-you-to-the-couch”, anti-anxiety effect.

Method 2: Check the Trichomes
This method is more accurate, but you need a magnifier of some kind. The best microscope for checking trichomes is the digital type, since it gives you a more accurate image.

That said, a jeweler’s loupe like this one is generally much cheaper. I’d pay more and go with a full microscope.

Use the magnifier to examine the trichomes. These are the crystals, or the frosty-looking stuff you see accumulating on your buds.

You only care about the ones with the ball on top, that look like little mushrooms. These are the ones that give weed its potency. The color of these trichomes determines when to harvest your weed.

You get more of a heady high when some trichomes are clear and some are cloudy or milky white
You get the highest THC levels when most of the trichomes have turned milky white or cloudy
When the trichomes have become darker (generally amber or gold, but sometimes pink or purple) you have reached the end of the harvest window. Harvesting now means more CBN for a more relaxing and anti-anxiety high.
Here is a graphic that shows you what to look for:


Image courtesy of Grow Weed Easy
 

Best Way To Grow Weed Indoors: Final Thoughts
Once you have harvested your bud, it is time to dry it and cure it. I will cover that in a separate article, since this one is about growing weed indoors.

If you have any questions about growing, please feel free to leave a comment below. I read them all and will answer any questions I can.

As a potential first-time grower, getting started is the biggest roadblock you’ll likely face. First, you have to find the right place to cultivate and obtain the proper growing equipment. Then, you need to buy cannabis seeds and spend a lot of time checking and maintaining your crop.

You must also operate within the boundaries of the law before getting started. Growing marijuana remains illegal in many U.S. states. Make sure home cultivation is allowed where you live before proceeding. Assuming you are legally able to continue, keep reading our detailed guide to growing cannabis indoors.


Step 1: Choose the Perfect Cannabis Grow Room
You don’t need a particularly large growing/cultivating space. A typical grow room for a small-scale grower is a small tent, cabinet, or designated area in a spare room, even an unused corner of the house is sufficient! Here are a few helpful tips to get started.

cannabis grow

1 – Begin Growing from a Small Plot & Adjust as Necessary
By “small,” I mean nothing more than a few plants at most. You can start with just one or two plants. There’s an inevitable learning curve involved with growing weed indoors and you’re bound to make some mistakes.

how to grow marijuana

It shouldn’t take long to get the hang of things and start producing some beautiful, flowering cannabis plants, but you’ll need to make room as your plants grow. From the first signs of flowering, you can expect a plant to double or even triple in size by harvest time.

Make sure that you have enough space to work in!

2 – A Clean Space is One of the Most Important Things to Remember
Make sure your cultivating space is sanitized and clean. There’s an inherent risk posed by pests and contaminants. A messy space invites pathogens, harmful bacteria, and mold. A good idea is to plan a bi-weekly cleaning routine and stick to it.

Marijuana plants are “bioaccumulators,” which means they “suck up” everything around them (both in the air and the soil). Make sure the area surrounding the plants is clean enough to keep potential contaminants out.

3 – Keep Your Grow Space as “Light-Sealed” as Possible
Light is essential for the growing process. Your plants receive direct light the majority of the time. Be direct here: eg. plants need 12 hours of continuous, uninterrupted darkness to flower and eventually produce buds.

Like most living things, cannabis plants need their “rest time.” If light from a surrounding source is seeping in during dark hours, the (bud-producing) females could get confused and develop hermaphroditic characteristics.

A hermaphrodite cannabis plant will produce flower that’s full of seeds, ruining your chances of a decent yield of smokable buds.

4 – Successful Indoor Growing Requires the Following Features
Choose a secure place safe away from animal and human invaders, somewhere you can monitor them regularly.
Temperature and humidity need to be carefully and conscientiously managed.
Make sure your spot is safe and easily accessible at any time, day or night.
VIDEO OF THE DAY

Magic Mushrooms: The Complete Beginner’s Guide
Learn More
Step 2: Choose (and Use) Your Cannabis Grow Lights
The light source you use in your grow room plays a significant role in determining the quality of the plants. I recommend spending a large portion of your budget on a good lighting setup. It is worth it in the end, particularly if you plan on growing long term.

cannabis plants

Here’s a basic rundown of the most popular types of cannabis grow lights used today.

LED grow lights
If cost isn’t a consideration, LED (light-emitting diode) lighting is the preferred option for most marijuana growers. These are highly efficient light fixtures for indoor growing. They use less energy and create very little heat. LEDs produce wavelengths across the light spectrum, so they can be used for both the vegetative and flowering cycles.

The drawback is they can cost 3-5 times more than a decent HID setup! If you’re serious about getting into growing and have money to spend, however, give serious consideration to LEDs. But do your homework to avoid ‘scam’ LEDs online.

Induction grow lights
Induction lamps are an odd choice for indoor growers. However, some companies have recently adapted them for the cannabis industry. They can potentially represent decent value in terms of cost and efficiency.

growing marijuana

Nikola Tesla invented the process of generating heat from magnetic induction in the 19th century. These types of lamps produce bright light with little heat compared to HID setups.

HID grow lights
The most commonly used lights for DIY-style growing are probably HID (high-intensity discharge) grow lights. They typically represent the best overall value in terms of cost, efficiency, and ease-of-operation.

The main drawback is that they require numerous accessories to run correctly. As a consequence, the overall cost can ramp up pretty quickly, depending on how much you’re willing to splurge.

For example, most growers use one of two main types of HID lamps/bulbs depending on the developmental stage. Metal halide (MH) bulbs are best during vegetative growth. High-Pressure Sodium (HPS) is the preferred option for the mature flowering stage. If you can only afford one, choose HPS as they are much better for flowering and are more efficient on a ‘watt-to-light’ scale.

HID lights produce a substantial amount of heat. Therefore, proper use of air circulation and conditioning becomes vital. Some growers choose air-cooled fixtures to mechanically remove heat.

Fluorescent grow lights
Fluorescent lights are generally much cheaper and easier to use than the other options. They represent an excellent option for propagation of young plants or those with extremely low yield expectation. And remember: watts = grams. Low wattage will not prevent you from growing potent little flowers. They also don’t require a connection to an external ventilation system. Fluorescent lights are far less powerful than the other options. However, for novice DIY growers with a single plant or two and little space, they might be your best bet.

Step 3: Fresh Air is the Lifeblood of Healthy Cannabis Plants
Make sure you have consistent airflow across your entire plot. Depending on the size of your grow room, you can achieve this easily. Utilize several types of fans, including oscillating wall mount, stand fans, and box fans. Place them strategically to create good air flow throughout the space.

growing marijuana indoors

Since warmer air rises, mount your exhaust fan(s) high so they can suck out hot, stagnant air. On the flip side, your intake fan should be mounted low so it can provide a good supply of cool, CO2-filled fresh air. This technique allows for a constant supply of fresh air for your plants. It also helps keep temperatures to a manageable level.

Most cannabis strains prefer an upper-temperature range between 75- and 85-degrees Fahrenheit. When the lights are off, keep room temperature between 55 and 75 degrees. Indica strains tend to prefer the cooler end of the range.

Step 4: Develop a Control System and Monitor the Growing Process
The next step is a self-monitoring system to control it all. We assume you can’t spend 24 hours a day in your grow space! You need a 24-hour timer and an adjustable thermostat. The latter allows you to set your exhaust fan to switch on once temperatures go above a certain degree. The result is a relatively stable temperature range and humidity level while saving energy and money.

The 24-hour timer is just as important. When the marijuana plants are in vegetative growth, you need the light supply on for around 16-24 hours per day. Once they mature and reach the flowering stage, your plants need 12 hours light and 12 hours dark.

We also recommend investing in a pH meter to check on the quality of your water and soil regularly. If you’re growing in soil, try to keep the pH between 6 and 7, with the sweet spot being 6.2-6.5. If you’re growing hydroponically, 5.5 to 6.5 is an appropriate range with the sweet spot of 5.8-6.0.


EDITOR’S CHOICE – ILoveGrowingMarijuana
ILoveGrowingMarijuana are the masters when it comes to seeds. Offering a massive variety of cannabis seeds that are well categorized, not only does this company create a resource for superb quality options including feminized seeds, it also provides extensive growing information for those looking for some support along their journey.

5% COUPON CODE
5OFF
Visit Official Site
Step 5: Be an Artist! [And Choose a Cannabis “Grow Medium”…]
When cultivating cannabis indoors, there are two viable options: Growing in traditional soil or a hydroponic tray. Soil is typically recommended if you’re growing indoors for the first time. It’s cheaper, more straightforward, and more forgiving than an advanced hydroponic system. Let’s take a closer look at each of the two options.

how to grow weed indoors

Soil vs. Soilless Growing
Soil is less expensive, easier, and offers a higher margin of error. However, you need to carefully select the soil you use because quality can vary enormously.

General potting soil doesn’t work very well. You want a high-grade horticultural potting mix, which is light and airy. Some mixes come “charged” with a small amount of nutrients to get you through the first few weeks. However, these will need regular fertilizing later.

Other mixes are “neutral,” without any nutrients present. These mixes need appropriate amounts of fertilizer right from the start. Amendments to soil ingredients include compost teas and mycorrhizae bacteria, as well as other organic compost nutrients.

Another idea is “all-in-one” automated hydroponic setups, which may help you experience faster growth and more abundant yields. This is only the case if everything is done correctly – all the time, every time (unlike soil which has natural buffers to give you some wiggle room).

A hydroponic system delivers all necessary mineral salt nutrients to plants in water. If you want to choose hydroponic over traditional soil, there are several types which are straightforward and fairly easy to understand. These include Ebb and Flow, Flood and drain and DWC or Deep Water Culture.

Step 6: Choose a “Canna-tainer” (Container) to Grow Your Cannabis In
It’s very important to grow your cannabis plants to a size suitable to your space and likewise to the container you choose. You will need to transplant every time your plants double to triple their size. Small cups or 4-6” pots are good for starts.

Think about how big you ultimately want to grow your plants when deciding on pot size for their final home. I suggest one-gallon of soil for every foot tall you intend to grow them. Regardless, plants don’t like waterlogged conditions so perforate the bottom of the bucket so the water can drain as needed.

how to grow marijuana indoors

There are some outstanding pre-filled soil kits specially designed for increased airflow. Keep these in mind when deciding what to grow your first cannabis plants in.

Step 7: Show Your Cannabis Plants Some Love (By Giving Them Lots of Nutrients)
Ensuring your plants get the right nutrients is probably second only to lighting in terms of importance. Proper nutrient selection and application are among the most critical factors in growing premium-grade cannabis. While weed is resilient, growing it in sub-optimal conditions means you will miss out on yield and potency.

Whether you’re using an organic soil mix or growing hydroponically, your cannabis plants need the “super seven” macronutrients. In no particular order, these are:

Nitrogen (N)
Phosphorous (P)
Potassium (K)
Calcium (Ca
Magnesium (Mg)
Iron (Fe)
Copper (Cu)
You can get these macronutrients pre-packaged in liquid or powder form (if you’re using an un-supplemented soil mix). However, a lot of organic “super soils” already contain them in sufficient amounts.

cannabis harvesting

Lastly, some strains indeed require more calcium than others to produce robust, healthy nugs. Perform a little research on the particular strain you are growing. This process enables you to become more familiar with the kind of “food” it needs and prefers the most.

Step 8: Cannabis Plants LOVE Water!
A common assumption amongst rookie plant growers is that the more you water, the better.

While this is true to an extent, there is such a thing as “too much water.” Overwatering your indoor cannabis plants can prove detrimental to their productivity, and potentially stunt or kill them!

The frequency of watering and the amount you give is determined by a few obvious things. These include the size of the plant, the stage of development, and the rate of photosynthesis (how fast it’s growing). However, there’s no exact science when deciding how much water to give and how often.

harvesting hemp

Make sure there are holes drilled into your growing container so the water can drain out. When watering, try, and only moisten the soil rather than saturating it. This allows you to fully saturate the pot without overwatering. Try not to water until they’re almost dry. This is called cycling.

Lastly, consider using an RO filter as excess levels of chlorine and unfiltered minerals could harm the plants. You may want to choose a distilled option or at least filter it before adding it to your soil. Mineral-laden tap water can cause unwanted build-up in the cannabis root systems, which can lead to detrimental root disease.

Step 9: Set Time to Care For Your Plant (Every Single Day!)
DIY indoor growers are unable to perform a 24/7 watch over their plants. However, you can provide adequate care by setting aside a few minutes a day. Routine checks, such as ensuring things like temperature, humidity, pH, and water levels are correct, are essential.

cultivating cannabis plants

Also, watch out for male plants in your crop. If you wish to grow high-THC buds, the only thing you want in your crop is female plants. If you have a male in your crop, REMOVE IT. Once it reaches maturity and its pollen sacs burst, it fertilizes the females. At this point, they’ll start developing seeds rather than growing buds. While the plants won’t die, their ability to yield buds is ruined.

If you don’t know how to tell a male cannabis plant from a female, we’ve got a great article on the topic.

grow indoors weed

If you’re growing from seed, you need to wait until the flowering stage. After a week of nighttime photoperiod, the plants will start reaching maturity and will develop reproductive parts at the nodes.

This is when you can extract the male plants and eliminate them. Male plants will have what look like little clusters of bananas; these are the pollen sacs. Female plants will have sharper early-stage calyxes with white hairs (pistils). Those growing from female clones or pre-purchased feminized seeds should have no concerns about male plants.

Step 10: Cut Your Cannabis Plants Down — Carefully!
The final step involves harvesting your plants. Once you get used to the process, you’ll find it more enjoyable than tedious.

cannabis growers

The first step is to cut off the big water leaves, otherwise known as the fan leaves. They have minimal THC in them and are generally removed. You’ll notice a visible difference between the long, green fan leaves and the smaller sugar leaves. The latter is covered in resinous glands (trichomes).

Some people like to grind the sugar leaves and use them. However, it is all about the clean, leafless nugs if the goal is to fully enjoy an intoxicating high. You can use the sugar leaves to make cannabutter, however. After trimming, you should hang the buds up to dry. After 7-10 days, you can place them in airtight containers to cure. The more patient you are, the better the buds will taste. They are also more potent!

Final Thoughts on Growing Cannabis Indoors
Harvesting hemp and cannabis is a lovely experience. It is one we recommend to any weed lover who has a passion for all aspects of the plant. You learn so much about cannabis and botany/biology in general. Most growers believe they learn something new with every harvest.

There’s no doubt a bit of a learning curve involved. You’ll make your fair share of mistakes. However, trust us when we say it’s all worth it in the end.

Enjoy, and more than anything else; remember to HAVE FUN!

What are the basics of growing weed?
Indoor cannabis cultivation is a rewarding endeavor that basically can be done in any climate. Growing pot takes attention to detail and the right equipment, time, and money, but the benefits reaped from growing your own weed are more than worth the time and expense. Not only is the practice of gardening itself therapeutic, it also lends a connection to the plants that cannot be experienced outside of a hands-on approach. Having trained and grown out a favorite cultivar to fruition is one of life's great joys for a marijuana enthusiast.

Indoor cultivation provides many benefits compared to outdoor cultivation, including control, reproducibility, and risk mitigation — not to mention location, location, location. The goal is to artificially create the ideal environment for your plants at all growth stages. This is achieved through precise lighting, temperature, humidity, carbon dioxide content, and air movement within each indoor growing space.

Ultimately, the costs of equipment and recurring utility bills are more expensive than in outdoor and greenhouse settings. However, specialized indoor cultivation equipment allows cultivators to achieve multiple harvests per year and a more reproducible product. If you're detail-oriented and technologically inclined, indoor gardening is a fun and rewarding pastime, or could even be a full-time job. 

How to start growing weed
To set up an indoor garden, you will need equipment to help create a stable environment that mimics the necessary periods of light and darkness to grow plants through the flowering stage. This includes horticultural lighting, fans to recreate a gentle breeze, dehumidifiers to maintain the proper humidity, HVAC (heating, ventilation, and air conditioning), and all the basic supplies that a plant needs to survive, from water to grow media to nutrients.

Planning, designing, and implementing an indoor garden can seem daunting, but having a firm understanding of the basics goes a long way in helping a new indoor grower get started on the path to a healthy and bountiful harvest.

What Is the best way to grow marijuana indoors?
The first step in creating a proper indoor growing environment is to decide on the medium and irrigation methods you'll be using to supply your plants with the proper nutrients throughout their growth cycle. The medium is a shelter for your plants' roots that retains moisture. The irrigation method is the way you deliver nutrients to the plants.

Unlike outdoor cultivation — where you almost always use soil to grow your plants — growing indoors offers several different options for growing systems and media. Some media are easier to work with than others, while some are a little trickier, but offer more control over the finer details. Different media retain moisture at different rates, which in turn determines how often plants need to be watered. Some media harbor beneficial microbes that can help roots absorb nutrients better.

The two main options for an indoor garden are soil and hydroponic media. Consider the following:

Soil
Soil is a great choice for beginners. It can be much more forgiving and requires less precision when watering and feeding plants. Less-frequent watering and a stable pH foundation can drastically increase the likelihood of a successful first harvest. Soil also contains beneficial microbes and nutrients that help keep plants healthy, though it also creates favorable conditions for pests, mold, and mildew to spread. Working with soil and hand-watering plants can also be messy, but it will allow you to get familiar with the pace in which your plants consume water and nutrients.

cannabis plant soil
Soil can be much more forgiving and requires less precision when watering and feeding plants additional nutrients.
Photo by: Gina Coleman/Weedmaps
Hydroponics
Hydroponic media are viable indoor alternatives to soil, but they're considered more advanced because they bring with them a set of challenges that may prove difficult for beginners. Then again, if going hydroponic is in your plans, it's best to learn the method from the beginning.

Hydroponics is a blanket term for the growing of plants in a nutrient solution, with or without an inert medium to provide physical root support. Media such as fused basalt rock and chalk (known as rockwool), coconut fiber (coco coir), and clay pellets (hydroton) can drastically improve nutrient delivery. With a plant's roots system exposed, hydroponically grown cannabis can grow faster and more efficiently, requiring less water and fewer nutrients but also requiring monitoring systems to ensure a stable pH.

Soilless mediums
Rockwool, also known as mineral wool, is one of the most common forms of hydroponic media for the beginning stage of a plant's life. Rockwool is an inert substance, and its composition of mineral or rock fibers provides a relatively sterile environment with a unique capacity to hold water. Rockwool will quickly expose any watering or feeding mistakes. Missing even one day of watering could be detrimental when using rockwool, especially for tender young plants.

Coco Coir is the fibrous material found on and in coconut shells. As a byproduct of the coconut industry, it is favored by growers as a sustainable and renewable medium. Coco coir is an inert medium with a neutral pH that does not provide or maintain any nutrients. These qualities are great for growers who know how to appropriately adjust pH, allowing for quick pH and nutrient changes. There may be a learning curve, but if you're numerically inclined, it's not too hard to get a grip on the process. Coco coir can be used either by itself or added to soil or hydroton for improved drainage and growth capability.

Coco Coir cannabis plant
Coco Coir is the fibrous material found on and in coconut shells.
Photo by: Gina Coleman/Weedmaps
Hydroton is a lightweight expanded clay aggregate composed of porous clay pebbles that can be used alone in a hydroponic system or blended with soil or other soilless mediums. Hydroton does not retain water to the extent of coco coir or rockwool, but it does provide plant roots with equal levels of oxygen. Like rockwool, the biggest issue is that it can dry out very quickly, so you have to be extra careful to keep it hydrated, especially when used on its own.

Other common soilless mediums used by hydroponic growers include perlite, vermiculite, coarse sand, and gravel. Advanced growers frequently mix these media in custom quantities to create blends that suit their specific growing style and environment.

Cannabis feeding systems
Feeding your plant is the process of giving it the chemicals and compounds that it needs to grow out its leaves, roots, and ultimately produce the heavy, trichome-covered flower clusters called colas. There are two main types of feeding systems: drain-to-waste and recirculating.

A drain-to-waste system applies fresh nutrient solutions to the grow medium every time the plant is fed. Any nutrients that drain through the medium are then disposed of and not reused.

A recirculating system collects the nutrients and water that are used, replenishes them, but with a smaller amount of fresh nutrients, then reapplies the solution to the plants the next time the plant is fed. A grower will check the solution's pH before and after adjusting the nutrients.

When using soil as your primary medium, drain-to-waste is the only possibility. In soilless hydroponic systems, it is up to the growers' preferences. Most hydroponic growers will opt to maintain a drain-to-waste system, because it affords them full control over the application of nutrients. Recirculating systems are typically reserved for the most advanced and efficient cultivators.

Top feed drain-to-waste systems can be as simple as putting your plants in a soilless medium and watering them from the top of the container, either with a drip system or by hand.

Ebb and flow systems, also known as flood and drain systems, are a popular type of recirculating system that uses a pump to bring water and nutrients from a reservoir into a flood tray where the plants are positioned in their grow medium. The nutrient solution floods the tray and gets absorbed by the roots and medium before slowly draining back into the reservoir. This process repeats itself on a timer to ensure that plants are properly hydrated.

Nutrient Film Technique (NFT) is another recirculating system in which plants are suspended by net baskets or neoprene collars that run along a trough. A thin film of water and nutrients continually circulates through the bottom of the trough, providing food to the tips of the roots, while leaving a majority of the root mass exposed to air.

Deep Water Culture (DWC) is a modular bucket system that suspends the plant's main stem in a net basket while the roots are completely immersed in a highly oxygenated nutrient solution. An air pump supplies the oxygen to the nutrient solution which circulates through 3-5 gallon, or 11.4-18.9 liter, pots. DWC buckets can be configured to run in a stand-alone drain-to-waste system, or all of the buckets can be connected together to run in a recirculating manner.

Aeroponics are hydroponic systems in which the roots are suspended in air and lightly misted with a nutrient solution on regularly timed intervals. This method can achieve faster growth rates while using less water and nutrients than other hydroponic systems, though this is considered of the most advanced methods of growing hydroponically.

Setting up your grow: choosing a space
Before you purchase any equipment, it is important to understand the possible limitations of an indoor garden. Consider the height of the ceiling, how much insulation your space offers, and your ease of access to electricity and water. Some local jurisdictions may also ask that indoor gardens mitigate odors during the flowering phase.

If you're a beginner, prefabricated grow tents are a great option, as they allow for minimal wear and tear on your property. Instead of renovating or building a new room, grow tents can be set up and taken down in a matter of minutes while also providing a clean, reflective, and enclosed environment for your plants to grow. As a general rule, your ceiling height should be at least a height of 8 feet, or about 2.4 meters; this is the typical height of a tent. Check your prospective tent's measurements before committing to the purchase.

Grow tents also make it easier for home growers to maintain two separate environments: one for vegetative growth, and the other for flowering. This allows you to keep a perpetual harvest going by propagating and growing young plants in one tent and flowering another set of plants in the other tent. Maintaining a balanced rotation like this can result in maximized harvests year over year.

Electrical power
Whether you are growing two or 30 plants in your house, grow equipment requires a significant amount of electricity, primarily from your lighting and air conditioning units. Make sure that all electrical equipment is installed by a trained professional to reduce the likelihood of an electrical fire. You don't need to be an electrician to design an indoor grow, but having a basic understanding of watts, volts, and amps is essential. The equation below can be used to determine whether your property has the minimum amount of power for an indoor garden:

Amps = Watts/Volts

Always make a list of the power requirements for each piece of equipment and make sure your electrical panels can support the electrical load before you make any big equipment purchases.

Water
Water quality is another key aspect of indoor gardening. It's important to determine water acidity and general mineral content prior to planting. Checking the pH, the acidity or alkalinity of the water, is easy to do with a handheld water quality meter. The same device can be used to check the total mineral or chemical content of your water as well. Knowing these things will help you determine the correct amount of nutrients to feed your plants or if fresh water needs to be introduced.

Odor control
Most local jurisdictions require you mitigate the odor from your plants to avoid disturbing your neighbors. Activated charcoal filters absorb plant odor in your grow area. Adding a charcoal filter to your HVAC system or placing one within your grow space is a great way to drastically reduce the odor. The size of the filter is largely dependent on the size of your grow. Make sure filters are sized and installed correctly. Keep track of the life of the filter, as their effectiveness diminishes over time.

Security
Even when growing cannabis legally, it's a good idea to minimize your public visibility as a grower and take some mild to moderate precautions. Simple steps, such as not geotagging your location when you post grow pictures or hiding the glare from your grow lights when you run them at night, can go a long way in keeping your prized indoor garden secure.

Creating the ideal environment: lighting
Choosing the right horticultural lighting for your indoor grow can mean the difference between success and failure. Correct lighting is crucial, as it drives photosynthesis. In other words, your plants will not grow properly without proper lighting. The duration of your lighting controls the photoperiod, or the times in which a grow is exposed to light. During the vegetative growth phase, plants need a minimum of 16 hours of light. The most common schedule during this phase is 18 hours of light and six hours of darkness. To initiate flowering, plants need a shorter day, with 12 hours of light and 12 hours of darkness.

indoor cannabis cultivation lighting
Correct lighting is crucial, as it drives photosynthesis. In other words, your plants will not grow properly without proper lighting.
Photo by: Gina Coleman/Weedmaps
The intensity of light and its placement within your grow space are important aspects to consider when choosing what kind of light to grow with. Low light levels will slow photosynthesis, delay growth, and result in poor yields. If your light is too far away the plant will not receive enough of it and will grow spindly. If your light is too close it can damage the plant and ruin your colas.

There are several different types of grow lights that serve different purposes, each with their own sets of pros and cons.

Fluorescent lights are affordable and use minimal wattage to produce a low-intensity light. They are available in strips or larger arrays of multiple bulbs, and are most commonly used during the germination and propagation of seeds and clones. They should not be used during the flowering phase.

Metal-halide (MH) lights are a type of high-intensity discharge (HID) lights that work by igniting gas in a tube with a spark of electricity. Metal-halide bulbs emit a spectrum of light that is most beneficial during the vegetative phase. They emit more usable light for a plant than a fluorescent bulb does, but tend to cost substantially more.

High-pressure sodium (HPS) bulbs are highly efficient HID lights that produce a very effective spectrum of light to promote growth during the flowering phase. Most HPS bulbs are double-ended and can last 10,000 hours without losing efficiency. While these lights are the workhorses of most grow rooms today, they produce a significant amount of heat that needs to be removed, increasing air conditioning requirements.

Light-emitting diode (LED) lights are another form of high-intensity lighting that have been growing in popularity as their technology has advanced. LED lights produce a spectrum suited for all phases of plant life. They typically cost more than other grow lights, but they last much longer, are more energy efficient, and give off a lot less heat than HID lighting.

Creating the ideal environment
When it comes to cultivating cannabis indoors, you need to be sure to provide your plant with the optimal temperature, humidity, air circulation, CO2, and nutrients.

Temperature and Humidity
Maintaining the ideal temperature and humidity at all times is crucial to the health of your plants. Some plant varieties prefer hot and humid climates, while others like it cool and dry. Keeping them alive and healthy means controlling the temperature and humidity when the lights are on or off.

Air conditioning (AC) and humidification systems are used to control the temperature and relative humidity of an indoor grow room. The size of each unit is based on the amount of heat the lights and other equipment produce in relation to the size of the space. In an open grow room, intake and exhaust fans are used to constantly exchange the air within the room to maintain a consistent temperature. In sealed rooms, mini-split AC systems are used because they circulate the air in the room without bringing in fresh air.

AC systems maintain temperature and also dehumidify rooms. Fluctuations in humidity can affect plant health and should be controlled using a dehumidifier or humidifier, depending on conditions.

Advanced growers use digital environmental controls to monitor all equipment responsible for maintaining a stable environment (i.e., fans, AC, dehumidifiers, sensors, thermostats, etc.). These environmental controls can be worth the hefty price tag for the peace of mind they provide.

Nutrients
With lighting, AC, and other environmental controls in place, indoor cannabis plants will require large amounts of fertilizer or nutrients throughout their lifespans. Hydroponic systems lack the base nutrients that occur within soil; that leaves it up to you, the grower, to feed their plants with nutrient concentrations — the exact formula of which depends upon plant variety and phase of cultivation. With hydroponics, salt-based nutrients typically come in the form of a concentrated liquid or dry soluble powder that can be mixed with water.

As a cannabis plant develops, its nutrient needs change. That's why different nutrient lines are available for different growth phases. Most nutrient lines come with recommended feeding charts. If you're just starting out, be sure to get to know your nutrients and their ratios.

Carbon dioxide supplementation
Controlling the amount of available carbon dioxide (CO2) in your garden is another aspect of growing marijuana at home. During photosynthesis, CO2 converts into sugar, which the plant uses as energy for growing its vegetation and, ultimately, its seeds or flowers. Adding CO2 to your indoor garden can drastically improve your yields. While the atmosphere naturally has an average CO2 concentration of around 400 parts per million (PPM), most indoor growers try to maintain a range of 800 to 2,000 PPM, depending on the plants' growth stage. Levels above 2,000 PPM can damage plants, and anything above 3,000 PPM can be dangerous to humans.

The amount of CO2 you supplement your garden with depends on how much light your plants are receiving, the growth phase they are in, and their overall size. CO2 should only be used during the “daylight” period, as plants are unable to utilize CO2 at night or in the dark. Sealed grow rooms are ideal when supplementing CO2, as open rooms tend to exhaust the CO2 more quickly than the plants can use it.

CO2 can be supplemented into an indoor garden using compressed gas tanks or generators. Using compressed CO2 tanks is the most common method because they're readily available, easy to set up, and do not add any extra heat to your room the way a CO2 generator does.

Air circulation
Air movement is the least expensive component of creating an ideal environment for your plants. Even a gentle breeze can help keep pests and microbes from landing on your plants, move oxygen and carbon dioxide around the leaves, and create a uniform environment throughout your room. One of the easiest ways to maintain sufficient air circulation is by hanging oscillating fans on the walls or ceiling/grow tent corners and placing a small box fan on the floor. The goal with air circulation should be to mimic a light breeze and avoid powerful gusts that may harm your plants.

Tips for success
The health of your garden is completely dependent upon the environment you create and the equipment you select. It is easy to buy a new line of nutrients, but much more difficult to replace an undersized air conditioner. Careful planning prior to your grow will go a long way in saving you from expensive mishaps.

Cleanliness in an indoor garden cannot be overstated. Clean your entire grow room before your first grow cycle and after every harvest. The walls, floors, trays, irrigation lines, reservoirs, lights, and fans should be cleaned using a three to five percent (3%-5%) hydrogen peroxide solution, an efficient sterilizing agent that leaves no dangerous or toxic residues behind. Be careful what you bring into your grow room. Pets, dirty clothes, and contaminated clones can introduce unwanted pests and diseases.

Maintaining a grow journal and logging all major aspects of your grow is one of the cheapest, easiest things you can do to become a better grower. Logging daily temperatures along with water and feeding amounts will help you pinpoint problems, and may give you something to show other growers who can help you resolve issues, increase your yields, and save a troubled crop.

Remember, not everyone was born with a green thumb or an affinity for setting up and maintaining equipment. But with practice, passion, and an attention to detail, you can ready yourself for an amazing growing experience that has the potential to change your views of and interaction with cannabis for good.

Frequently asked questions
Should you grow cannabis with distilled water or reverse osmosis water?
Distilled and reverse osmosis water are fairly comparable. It's the process of distilling that differs from the reverse osmosis process. Distilled water has been boiled to a vapor and cooled back into liquid to filter out contaminants. Reverse osmosis (RO) filters pressure water through a filtration membrane and produce wastewater as a byproduct. They're generally better than distillers at removing volatile chemicals such as chloramines. 

RO filters can remove 95% or more of contaminants, and typically increase in efficiency when pre-filters are placed before them in a filtration system. Carbon or sediment filters remove chlorine and chloramines as well as larger solids such as sediment and dirt. Water softeners exchange calcium and magnesium for sodium chloride so it can be purified and softened through the RO filter.

Growing Marijuana Indoors
Robert Bergman
August 25, 2021
Growing Marijuana Indoors
It’s a matter of fact that standard outdoor marijuana setups yield much more than the typical indoor setup. But this article will share some tips and tricks that help make up for that difference in yield. There also some things that every new grower should consider, and we will discuss those as well. We’ve also included the best soil for growing marijuana indoors and the best indoor lighting options for your setup. 

Indoor Marijuana Growing
The Benefits of Indoor Cannabis CultivationChoosing Your Grow MediumThe Tools and Equipment You NeedCreating the Ideal Indoor Environment for Your Weed PlantsAdvanced Growing Techniques to Increase Your Indoor Cannabis YieldMore Tips on Growing Marijuana IndoorsFinal Thoughts on Growing Marijuana IndoorsFAQs About Indoor Cannabis Growing
So, if you want to know more about how to start growing marijuana indoors, then continue reading! Who knows, there might be some tips on growing marijuana indoors that you haven’t already heard.

Why Grow Marijuana?
Whether it’s for recreational purposes or medicinal, knowing how to start growing your marijuana indoors will save you a lot of money in the long run. Keep in mind; dispensaries charge around $326 per ounce of high-quality marijuana.

Why Grow Marijuana
Growing your own marijuana has a lot of benefits
As you begin your garden, you become more aware of the costs of cultivating marijuana. You will notice things such as lighting, water, and other factors that contribute to the cost of growing marijuana from seeds indoors.

If that sounds like growing weed is stressful, it’s not. It’s fun growing your own! The sense of accomplishment you earn when you get a good harvest is similar to growing your own produce. For me, there’s no line between growing your own food and growing your own kush. You should place the same amount of thought and effort into one as you put in the other.

How do you make it fun? You study and practice the best techniques you can find, just like what you’re doing now. And as that becomes a habit, it becomes a hobby instead of a task. 

Advanced Growing Techniques For A Bigger Yield
Advanced Growing Techniques For A Bigger Yield
Advanced Growing Techniques For A Bigger Yield
Did you know that you can actually train your cannabis plants? Know some advanced growing techniques that can help make indoor growing more efficient and encourage bigger yields.

The sweat you poured into growing your own cannabis gives way to the joy you’ll feel when all that effort bears fruit (big juicy nugs). That experience alone will give you the second greatest high of your life! And that’s the fun of it.

The downside to growing your own cannabis is the potential for failure. Your harvest may end up being a complete failure. For many, that is the largest danger you face when growing your own marijuana. From a cost-effectiveness and overall quality of life point of view, it’s a lot smarter to cultivate your own.

The Benefits of Indoor Cannabis Cultivation
The Benefits of Indoor Cannabis Cultivation
Indoor cannabis plants
Growing marijuana from seeds indoors has benefits that outweigh growing outdoors. There are many reasons to grow your weed indoors, but here are some of the best benefits as well as some great tips on growing marijuana indoors.

Hygiene
One key advantage of indoor cultivation over outdoor cultivation is that you have complete control over the growing environment. Although this doesn’t necessarily remove the problems of pests and fungi, it does drastically reduce them.

Good hygiene also helps reduce the amount of other microscopic organisms like parasites and germs that will ruin the quality of your harvest. It’s a lot easier to get rid of these issues indoors instead of facing all of nature.  

Then there’s the benefit of a clean yield. Because there are fewer pest and fungal problems, this also means you use a lot fewer pesticides and other chemical sprays that will taint your harvest.

The Benefits of Indoor Cannabis Cultivation - Hygiene
It’s easier to practice good hygiene in your marijuana grow room
A clean harvest can increase the quality of your marijuana while reducing the chance of attracting microscopic organisms that cause plant illnesses. Knowing that marijuana is also used therapeutically by those with weak or sensitive immune systems or breathing problems, it is essential to avoid dangerous spores and pesticides. Indoor marijuana gardens make it easy to control these variables. 

Climate Control
By growing your cannabis in climate-controlled environments such as a greenhouse or grow cabinet, you can provide the perfect setting for your plants. That doesn’t mean marijuana plants are fickle. They can grow anywhere, and some resilient cannabis strains can grow in less-than-optimal environments.

However, you want to provide the best environment for your plants to get the highest quality yield. To do that, you need to control the elements that can affect your marijuana.

Elements such as temperature, CO2 levels, and humidity are just a few factors that can affect the quality of your harvest. Having too much or too little of any one of these can lead to a poor yield.

If your grow room’s humidity is too high, mold may grow on your plants. And inversely, if you increase the levels of CO2 in your greenhouse, you can improve yield. An indoor setup also keeps you from worrying about periods of droughts and violent storms that can ruin all of your hard work.

Multiple Harvests
Normally, cannabis is an annual plant with a few flowering periods in a year. And if you don’t have the right conditions for them to flower, it can result in a poor harvest. This is a problem for many outdoor growers who are at the mercy of the season and must follow a grow calendar. They do not have an entire year to produce the perfect environment and receive the maximum possible yield.

The Benefits of Indoor Cannabis Cultivation - Multiple Harvests
Growing cannabis indoors can reward you with multiple harvests
But with climate control at your fingertips, you can have several harvests in a year. Hypothetically speaking, because it only takes two months for cannabis to mature and flower, you can have a maximum of 6 flowering periods in a year. Since you can control the environment, you only need lights. This is why most growers prioritize grow lights because when growing marijuana indoors lighting is crucial for the plant.

Light plays a big factor in both stages of growing marijuana. Too much sunlight can stress marijuana into becoming hermaphrodites. If you play your cards right and time the hours of light your plants get in each room, you can have back-to-back harvests.

Know how to perfectly time your harvest with my free mini harvesting guide.


Enter your Email
FREE DOWNLOAD (PDF)
Free Harvest Guide

✔️ Time Your Harvest for Perfect Taste
✔️ Get THC Levels for a Perfect High
✔️ Don't Waste Precious Flowering Bud

To grow throughout the year, you will need two rooms, one for the vegetative phase (18 hours of light) and the other for the flowering phase (12 hours of light). 

Privacy
Privacy when growing marijuana indoors doesn’t just mean ensuring your neighbors do not see your plants. It also means they cannot smell them. 

Most growers often forget to consider this aspect of cannabis growing. When growing marijuana indoors, you will notice the pungent odor of the plant’s essential oils (terpenes) that it secretes while flowering.

Benefits of Indoor Cannabis Cultivation_Privacy
You’re less likely to worry about the odor of your cannabis plants when you’re growing them indoors
The strong odor is described either as floral, fruity, or gas-like. Some outdoor plants are noticeable up to a mile away. With that in mind, it’s easy to see why growing indoors will give you more privacy.

Your neighbors may not like it if you grow smelly cannabis outdoors. That’s why keeping your plants indoors is a great way to avoid multiple complaints from all around the block.

Higher Quality Yield
I said it before, and I will say it again; growing marijuana from seeds indoors produces higher quality cannabis. Here’s why. 

Hygiene and climate control are the two largest variables for the quality of your harvest. For example, with hygiene, having a sterile room reduces the chances of fungi infecting your plants. It also brings down the number of microscopic organisms and other pests that can taint your harvest.

It’s a big problem when growers see their plants littered with fungi and pests. That’s because by using chemical sprays, they still end up ruining their own harvest by tainting it with pesticides. This is why most growers opt for natural methods, but of course, the better alternative is to reduce the chances of it ever happening by growing their plants indoors. Doing so reduces their use of chemical sprays as pests are at a more manageable size.

Want all-natural pest control for your plants? Try my Bug Blaster. 

BUY PLANT PROTECTOR
Optimized climate control also leads to higher-quality marijuana. Elements such as temperature, humidity, and C02 levels can affect the quality of your plants – and grow rooms allow you to control those elements. By setting the right level of humidity in your grow room, you avoid mold that will ruin the quality of your harvest. And by increasing the C02 levels, you can increase the quality and the quantity of your harvest.

Choosing Your Grow Medium
When it’s time to pick the best medium for growing cannabis, it’s important to understand your options. Different types of cannabis grow best in specific mediums. With that knowledge in mind, picking the type of plant is as important as choosing the medium to pair with it.

Soil
Soil is, by far, the most popular medium simply because it is abundant and easy to prepare. Soil is also rich in nutrients and doesn’t require a lot of supplemental nutrition to nurture your plants.

For the best results, many growers typically use an organic potting mix. They are a mixture of non-peat-based, sterilized, loose potting compost.

Soil Potting Mix
Soil is the most popular growing medium for marijuana
A great example of an organic potting mix is Fox Farm Ocean Forest. It’s rich and light but packed with nutrients that your cannabis needs, making it our choice for the best soil for growing marijuana indoors.

The best benefit of growing your cannabis in soil is that it develops a richer taste profile and improves its odor. It’s also the easiest growing medium to maintain as soil only requires a bit of water from time to time and a few additional nutrients. This makes it perfect for beginners.

The problem with soil is that it generally takes longer for the plant to grow. On top of that, there’s the issue of root-bound plants which never reach their full potential. 

You can also run into some nutrient issues that are difficult to fix quickly. If it is already too late for your plants (perhaps the issue didn’t present itself right away), it may take too long to repair conditions when grown in soil. If you have any concerns, use our symptom checker as soon as possible. 

Hydroponics
Hydroponics is a soil-less method of growing plants. It uses mineral nutrient-rich solutions in water to nourish crops, which is absorbed faster than in soil mediums. Because of that, plants cultivated using this method grow faster than in soil or other growing mediums.

Hydroponics
A hydroponics cannabis growing setup
Marijuana requires a lot of nutrients to grow, and it benefits from a hydroponics setup. Marijuana doesn’t just grow faster hydroponically; it also delivers the highest yield. Hydroponic setups are also less likely to experience pests.

There are numerous methods for growing hydroponically. The best style for growing cannabis is the top-fed Deep Water Culture system or DWC. Why? The DWC method is one of the few hydroponics setups that can support larger and nutrient-hungry plants like cannabis.

To ensure a large harvest in a short time in a DWC setup, it’s important always to include a root supplement for your cannabis. This encourages massive root production, so your marijuana absorbs nutrients faster.

Hydroponics setups are the ideal method for a grower that’s looking for a large harvest in a short time. However, this is definitely not for beginners. First of all, you need to know how to build your own hydroponics setup properly.

Beyond that, you need to constantly monitor your roots for mold, fungus, and worst of all root rot. While it’s true that hydro removes the concerns of pests, it definitely does not reduce the amount of work. However, having to check and clean the roots of your cannabis constantly is a much easier task than clearing pests.

Other Grow Mediums
There’re a couple of other grow mediums that are useful for growing cannabis. Coco fiber, peat moss, Rockwool, perlite, and vermiculite are just a few examples of soilless mediums that are great for cannabis. You can also combine these different growing mediums. Currently, the best combination for cannabis growing is coco fiber (or coir) and perlite.

Coco coir is the middle ground between soil and hydro. Plants using this method take longer to grow than hydroponics but grow a lot faster than in soil. Coco coir alone doesn’t have any nutritional value (unlike soil), but it can hold nutrients much longer than hydroponics which saves you from having to stream heavy amounts of water.

Other Grow Mediums - Coco Coir
Coco coir
Soilless grow mediums also have benefits that are similar to hydroponics, especially when it comes to pests. You also do not have to worry about the roots growing mold or rotting, which is the main issue with most hydro setups.

And on the note of roots, perlite helps improve soil aeration by modifying the substructure. It keeps it loose to allow for better draining and stronger root formations. The only issue with soilless growing mediums like coco coir and perlite is poor preparation. If you don’t properly break down and mix coco, you can end up with a high pH level that can harm your cannabis.

The Tools and Equipment You Need
With the different growing mediums covered, we now move onto the tools and equipment you need to grow marijuana indoors. There are only just a few things that go into building a proper grow room for your marijuana. However, you must know each and every element so that you can get the most out of your harvest.

 It’s also important to keep local regulations in mind, whether you are growing in the United States or Australia. Many states permit a limited number of plants, so keep that in mind as you plan your indoor setup!

Here’s what you will need:

Grow Room
A marijuana grow room
A grow room or an indoor space is any room that you dedicate to growing your cannabis. It could be a small tent, cabinet, or spare room inside your home.

Preferably, set aside two grow rooms to experience the full benefits of an indoor setup. As mentioned before, having a dedicated grow room for the vegetative phase and the flowering phase will allow you to have multiple harvests in a year. 

If managing two grow rooms sounds a little too pricey, especially if you’re just starting out, it is. It’s perfectly fine to start with a single, small grow room that can hold around two to three plants. A smaller setup is a lot less expensive, making it less painful if you happen to make a mistake and fail to produce a decent harvest.

When creating a space for your cannabis, it’s important to take into account the area the plants will cover as they grow. Equally as important are the spots for the lights, ventilation, and other equipment that you decide to include. You don’t want to end up with a cramped setup that’s too small for your plants!

Lights
To reiterate, light plays a crucial role in the stages of cannabis growth. This is why one of the advantages of indoor setups is having full control over the light exposure your plants receive. It’s also why when growing marijuana indoors lighting is an important factor to consider.

Having two grow rooms maximizes that benefit. With two rooms, you can set one room to provide 18 hours of light for the vegetation phase of one batch while the other provides 12 hours of light for the flowering phase of another batch. Here are some of the lights that you can choose from: 

HID Grow Bulbs
HID Grow Bulbs
HID Grow Bulbs
High-Intensity Discharge lights are commonly light huge areas. Even those designed for growing plants are best used in sizable grow rooms. Growers value these types of lights for their output, efficiency, and value.HID has two main types: metal halide (MH), which is best used during the vegetation phase, and high-pressure sodium (HPS), which is best for the flowering phase.

Fluorescent Grow Lights
Fluorescent Grow Light
Fluorescent Grow Lights
Fluorescent lights are perfect for small setups. The best options are T5 bulbs due to  their high output. These lights are also cheaper than other types and require a lot less maintenance than HID options. They also do not generate as much heat. However, fluorescent lights both take up space and consume more electricity than HID.

fluorescent lights both take up space and consume more electricity than HID.

LED Grow Lights
LED Grow Light
LED lights
Light Emitting Diodes have both fluorescent and HID lighting benefits, with the only drawback being their price. And it’s not a negligible drawback either; a custom LED grow light may be ten times more expensive than an HID. Recently, more affordable options entered the market, making LEDs popular for many home growers. 

Pots and Containers
When choosing your container for growing marijuana from seeds indoors, you can never go wrong with a versatile plastic container. However, the type you use will entirely depend on your growing medium (such as hydroponics), the system you want to implement, and the size of your plants.

And on the note of the size, plant your cannabis seeds in a one-gallon pot. Transplant it to a five-gallon once it’s in its vegetation phase.

Want more growing tips? My free Marijuana Grow Bible has everything you need to know to get started growing.

Claim your FREE Grow Bible

Enter your Email
FREE DOWNLOAD (PDF)

Choosing the best container comes down to the healthy root development of your cannabis, and for that, you should consider the following:

Drainage
Root rot is a persisting issue when it comes to growing cannabis (especially with a hydroponics system). To avoid that, choose a pot that’s well-draining. Be sure to strike a balance between water retention and drainage. Too little water retention can deprive your plants of their needed nutrients.

Oxygen
Oxygen and draining are in line with each other as both increases with the number of perforations in the container. If you’re using a soil mix or coco mix, soil aeration helps your roots get the required oxygen to function properly.

Space
Improper pot size can lead to rootbound cannabis. Not having enough space for your roots to branch out will choke your plant and make it difficult to absorb nutrients.

Pots and Containers - Space
Give enough space for your plant roots to grow
Durability
A good container should have a mix of rigidity and flexibility. Too rigid makes perforating holes difficult, too flexible and will cause your plant to tear through the container.

Water System
The ideal water system for most plants, including cannabis, is a drip irrigation system since it provides the water directly to your plant’s roots. In this setup, drip emitters next to your plants connect to the rest of the system via a feeder hose.

Although water systems aren’t entirely necessary, they provide lots of benefits – even if you only use the simplest systems such as bottle drip irrigation.

One of those benefits is water consumption. You would think that you would end up with more water consumption by installing a water system, but that couldn’t stray further from the truth. Drip irrigation can save you a lot of water compared to hand-watering and other irrigation styles. Your cannabis also benefits from this, as having a controlled flow keeps you from overwatering your marijuana plants.  

Water system
Watering system
There’s also the benefit of decreased fertilizer loss as water and nutrients are delivered directly in the plant’s root zones. And this also reduces the likelihood of unwanted pests, as harmful microorganisms thrive in moist areas around your plant.

The bottle drip irrigation is just one of the simplest and cheapest ways of providing a semi-automatic water system for your plants. Other methods are entirely automatic and provide timed water flow, but they’re a lot pricier as they require more working parts.

Nutrients
When it comes to nutrients, cannabis requires three main macronutrients. These are nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potassium (K). They serve as the building blocks in the growth and development of your plant. You commonly see these abbreviations on the front of fertilizer products in the form of an NPK ratio. This ratio tells you the amount of each particular nutrient present in the fertilizer.

What’s the key takeaway? Marijuana has different NPK ratios for different stages of growth; applying different types of fertilizer in each stage can contribute to the development of the plant.

There are also other nutrients involved in developing marijuana. Nutrients such as calcium, magnesium, and sulfur all contribute to the healthy growth of your marijuana. This means you shouldn’t just settle for the standard NPK fertilizer. You also must choose your nutrients based on your growing medium. Some nutrients will not work well in hydroponic mediums, while others do not do well in soil. Choose your nutrients based on your setup’s growing medium of choice.

Want the best food for your plants? My special blend of marijuana nutrients helps you grow the best weed.

BUY FERTILIZER SET
Marijuana Seeds
If you plan to grow marijuana, you’ll also need seeds. Luckily, you came to the right place. My seed bankis one of the best top-rated seed banks of 2021.

Why buy seeds from me? I include a germination guarantee, and my team is known for its great customer service. My store has some of the fastest shipping times to the US, and we also ship to Australia. 

If your seeds do not germinate, we will replace or refund you. Our highly responsive customer service team settles any issues fast and efficiently. Plus, if you’re new to growing marijuana, we’ll do our best to make the process easy and fun. From our detailed strain descriptions to useful seed finders, we do everything we can to help you grow your best weed.  

Shop my store for high-quality indoor seeds that you can grow confidently on your own.

BUY INDOOR SEEDS
Creating the Ideal Indoor Environment for Your Weed Plants
There’ are a few things to consider when creating your ideal marijuana grow room. Here are the basics and some tips on growing marijuana indoors that you may also find helpful.

Prep the area
First, you should clean the designated space for your grow room. Whether you use a cabinet, a spare room, or a tent, start by removing everything in the area. Then, close it off. Sealing off your area gives you the most control over the environment in your area. It can also provide a sterile space – free from microorganisms and pests – for growing your marijuana.

Next, pick spots for both lighting and ventilation. Lighting, as we know, plays an important role in growing cannabis, and so does ventilation. These working parts serve a bigger purpose of creating the perfect environment for your cannabis to thrive.

Prep the grow room area
Prep the area for your cannabis indoor grow
Striking a balance between insulation and air circulation is vital not just for your plants but for yourself as well. You don’t want the area to be too hot to work in.

Create the right temperature and humidity
Setting up your grow room and outfitting it with the right equipment is the easy part of any indoor garden setup. The difficult part is the technical side of ensuring the perfect environment for your cannabis plants. To make it even more challenging, the requirements change as the plant grows. 

Here are the ideal temperatures and humidity levels for each stage of the growing process.

Seedlings and clones
Ideal temperature:	68-77°F; 20-25°C
Humidity level:	High (65-70%)
In this stage, the plant has yet to develop their own root system and are entirely dependent on transpiration for their water intake. This means you’ll need high amounts of humidity until the seedlings have fully formed roots. You can achieve this by adjusting your grow room to support higher levels of humidity.

However, a better alternative is investing in a humidity dome for your seedlings. When you do this, you can set up your seedlings anywhere and use your grow room for the vegetation phase of your cannabis instead.

Vegetation stage
Ideal temperature:	68-77°F; 20-25°C (daytime) 62°F; 17°C (nighttime)
Humidity level:	High (70%) to Moderate (50-60%)
During the first week of the cannabis vegetation phase, young plants still prefer high humidity levels and similar temperatures. However, as they draw closer to maturity, they’ll require less and less humidity until they’re able to handle drier air. They’ll also need lower temperatures during night periods to avoid stressing the plant.

Flowering stage
Ideal temperature:	82°F; 28°C
Humidity level:	Low (40-50%)
Once your cannabis has reached the flowering phase, it can flourish at room temperature with low humidity. This is not only easy for yourself as you no longer have to do extensive maintenance on your plants, but it’s also easy for your cannabis. The lower temperature is the ideal environment to encourage the production of potent, trichome-rich buds.

Take note; you shouldn’t go higher than the recommended temperature (28°C) as it can cause the terpenes to evaporate from the leaves and slow bud growth. Terpenes are the aromatic compound that gives marijuana leaves their flavor profile and rich scent.

Ensure proper ventilation
Proper ventilation is just as important as light. It helps contribute to the growth and development of the plant. Cannabis requires fresh air for photosynthesis. Without proper air circulation, it will have a difficult time growing

Proper ventilation
Ensure proper ventilation in your grow room
Besides stunted growth, poor air circulation can turn your grow room into a breeding ground for pathogens and pests. And without proper ventilation, you will have a hard time controlling the humidity levels of your grow room.

The humidity levels in your grow room can rise as your plant completes transpiration combined with the warmth from any grow lights. In general, high humidity levels are a good thing for cannabis plants, especially during the earlier stages of growth. However, to keep your humidity levels at a certain percentage, install an extractor fan at the top of your grow room/tent. The fan will pull old air out of your grow space since hot air naturally rises.

Keep in mind that your extractor fan’s power is measured in CFM. It should be equal to the volume of your grow room for the most efficiency.

You should also install a carbon filter in your exhaust system. To do this, attach it to your exhaust hose (which is attached to the exhaust fan). The filter will then strain out any odors from the air, such as terpenes, and prevent the odor of your grow room from leaking out. This step helps ensure your neighbors aren’t bothered by your indoor garden. 

Ensure proper ventilation - use a carbon filter
Carbon filter is great to get rid of weed smell
To complete your ventilation system, add an oscillating fan and intake vents. Oscillating fans help encourage airflow around your space to avoid stagnant air, and intake vents help provide fresh air.

Lighting
To select the best grow lights, you must first choose the right type of light fixtures and the right size. And although it’s more expensive than an HID, we recommend LEDs as the best light fixtures for beginners.

LEDs not only fix the issue of generating too much heat, unlike fluorescent and HID lights, but they also have the best maximum output and last longer than both options. They also do not have the problem of a ‘warm-up period’ that HID lights often experience. These types of lights must remain on for a while to reach their maximum output.

And due to the minimal heat that LED lights generate, there is better water retention in your plants. This creates a much more efficient watering schedule.

Lighting - LED grow lights
LED growing lights
In addition to all of that, you can customize the size and output of your LED grow lights. This is vital when it comes to choosing the best light fixture for growing marijuana. And in some cases, you can even select the type of color the lights would take on. Color options are essential because various light spectrums affect the stages of cannabis growth in different ways.

However, as much as we like LED grow lights, that doesn’t necessarily mean that LED grow lights are the best option for you.

Choosing the best grow light comes down to the space your grow room has and the number of plants in it. If you’re running a much smaller setup, then fluorescent lights are a much more efficient alternative. If you have a larger grow room, then you may want to choose an HID grow light.

Advanced Growing Techniques to Increase Your Indoor Cannabis Yield
As mentioned at the start of the article, outdoor plants yield more than your standard indoor plants. This is mainly because the plant is allowed to grow wide and tall, with no ceiling to limit its growth. There’s also the added factor of the sun acting as nature’s perfect grow light to help build up the plant’s size.

But there are advanced indoor growing techniques that help indoor plants yield as much as outdoor plants – all while retaining a high-quality harvest that indoor cannabis is known for.

Screen of Green (SCROG) Method
Screen of Green (SCROG) Method
Screen of Green (SCROG) Method
Also known as scrogging, this technique is best for those growing a small number of marijuana plants that would like high yields. 

Scrogging is an effective technique for providing large harvests. It works by training your cannabis to grow outwards rather than upwards. You’ll need a fairly wide area to get the most out of scrogging, but the results are worth it! Not only do you get a harvest that’s equal to outdoor plants, but you also get a much higher yield with more potent buds and bushier plants.

The scrogging process is also quite simple. You simply lay a net (the ‘screen‘) on top of your plants, and as they grow onto that screen, you will tie them to it. The perfect size for the screen depends on the area you want your grow area to cover, but typically a 50x50cm screen with 5x5cm squares as best as you can pair it with an HID grow light or even a fluorescent light.

Scrogging is also typically paired with topping – a method that involves cutting the tops of your marijuana plant to encourage them to grow outwards rather than upwards.

Scrogging is also typically paired with topping
Topping a marijuana plant
You can watch a video of the process here. 

So, how do you properly apply SCROG?

Place the screen 50 to 60cm above the containers.
Once in the vegetation phase or once the plant has reached the screen, cut the top cola of your cannabis. This helps the growth hormones redistribute throughout the branches.
Prune any bottom branches to encourage growth on the top.
Force into flowering two days after pruning the bottom branches.
Attach all branches horizontally to the screen to promote outward growth.
Mainlining Weed
Mainlining uses the same principles as scrogging to encourage the development of large, uniform colas by training them to grow in a specific way. It is essentially a hybrid of LST, topping, and scrogging.

Manifolding is the process of mainlining. Manifolding splits the cannabis stem, creating a Y-shaped hub (a manifold). By cutting the top cola of the cannabis, you divert the nutrients and resources to the two nodes of the plant.

How does mainlining increase yield? It’s simple; by creating more than just one central cola, you end up with multiple central colas. That means you have a large cluster to harvest instead of one. 

Here’s a quick and easy breakdown of the process of how to create a manifold and mainline marijuana:

Manifolding
Mainlining Weed
Creating a Y-shaped hub (a manifold) as part of mainlining cannabis
Wait until your seedlings/clones have developed 5-8 nodes. It’s vital that you start this early, but not too early otherwise, you may just end up damaging your plant to the point of no recovery. 

How to do manifolding:

Once they’ve developed those nodes, cut the entire plant down to the 3rd node (the 3rd pair of leaves from the base).
Remove any additional growths and vegetation below the 3rd node. This will encourage your plant to divert all its nutrients and resources to just the pair.
With your two main pairs prepared, tie them down so that they aim to grow horizontally. You must do this gently so that the branch won’t snap.
Mainlining
Wait until each branch of your manifold has four new pairs of leaves. Then repeat the first two steps on both branches.
With this, you should have a total of 8 branches. Like with the last step in manifolding, tie them down gently and grow at the same height as the two main branches.
Now it’s just a matter of maintaining your plants by providing them with the required water, nutrients, and light they need.
For more on mainlining, read this article. 

Monster Cropping
Monster cropping is a training technique that uses flowering clones from a mother plant and reverts that mother plant to its vegetation phase. The cuttings are then induced to root in a different container (which can then help perpetuate the cycle).

Monster cropping
Monster Cropping
Monster cropping works by stressing your plants. Under normal circumstances, growers would avoid causing their cannabis stress as it would complicate and hinder the plant’s development. However, there is such a thing as beneficial stress. Some amounts of stress can cause marijuana to develop more bud sites and increase THC levels.

Controlled stress on cannabis plants encourages their built-in natural defenses into action. Similar to how when exposed to too much sunlight, cannabis will hermie. The same logic applies to monster cropping. When you purposefully damage the plant, it causes them to grow into gigantic plants that produce larger buds.

Monster cropping weed plants
Keep in mind; you must be careful when monster cropping. This technique is not for beginners, and it is not for autoflowers. As easy it sounds, knowing how and when to stress your plants is a lot trickier than most other training techniques. You can also introduce pathogens to your plant. That’s why, when monster cropping, you must use sterilized tools to avoid giving your plants an infection.

 Here are the steps for monster cropping:

Choose your best flowering cannabis plants and take cuttings from the bottom branches. Preferably pick a healthy plant that’s already two weeks into flowering.
Induce rooting in your cuttings by placing them in a rooting medium of either Rockwool or a container with water.
Re-veg your clones by changing their light cycle from 12 hours of light to 18. Once the clones re-veg, they will grow with round leaves and plenty of branches, which signifies that your monster cropping was a success!
Learn more about monster cropping in this article.

More Tips on Growing Marijuana Indoors
Odor control
As we’ve already established, you’ll need proper ventilation systems to avoid receiving complaints from your neighbors. One of the best tools for filtering out the odor from the extracted air in your grow room is a carbon filter. The activated carbon in the filter strains the smell of terpenes from the air, purifying it as it leaves your grow room.

Check the rules in your area.
Before you start researching how to start growing marijuana indoors, It’s important to know the guidelines around growing cannabis where you live. There may be limits on how much you can grow, or you may require a special license. Even if you know home growing is permitted where you live, if you are renting, you may want to check with the homeowner beforehand.

Check marijuana rules in your area
Always check marijuana growing rules in your area
Final Thoughts on Growing Marijuana Indoors
Indoor marijuana growing is an excellent option for many cannabis lovers. The method offers a controlled environment that allows for higher quality harvests even if space limits how much you can grow or how much your plants will yield. However, as we’ve established, by using certain techniques, you can make up for that.

No matter how you decide to grow your cannabis, it comes down to your own preferences. Do you want to deal with creating an indoor setup,  or do you have the means to grow discreetly outdoors?  When you’re ready to get started, revisit this article for all the advice that you need.

Growing weed indoors is one of the most rewarding experiences because there’s nothing that beats homegrown weed.

Now that you’re committed to learning how to grow weed indoors, it’s time to go over the necessary steps to transform you from a beginner to a green thumb.

Let’s begin!
Table of Contents
How Much Does It Cost to Grow Weed Indoors?
1. The Cost to Grow a Single Plant in a Closet
2. The Cost to Grow Ten Plants in a Grow Tent
The Yield of Growing Weed Indoors
Total Value For Money and Effort
The Golden Ratio of Gram-Per-Watt
Potential Price Per Gram of Growing Cannabis Indoors
Which Strains Are Best For Growing Weed Indoors?
How to Choose The Best Indoor Weed Strain
The Best Strains to Grow Indoors For Beginners
What Equipment is Needed to Grow Cannabis Indoors?
Should You Build a Grow Room or Buy a Grow Tent?
How Do You Setup an Indoor Cannabis Garden?
How Do You Grow Marijuana Indoors?
Step 1: Germinate Cannabis Seeds
Step 2: Transplant Cannabis Seedlings
Step 3: Plant Care and Maintenance During The Vegetative Phase
Step 4: The 12/12 Schedule and The Beginning of The Flowering Phase
Step 5: Plant Care and Maintenance During The Flowering Phase
Step 6: Determine Trichome Ripeness
Step 7: Harvest the Cannabis Flowers
Step 8: Manicure and Dry The Cannabis Flowers
Step 9: Cure The Weed
Step 10: Store The Weed
How Much Does It Cost to Grow Weed Indoors?
Before you do anything, you must understand the cost of growing weed indoors.

Overall, the cost of growing marijuana indoors ranges from $1,000 to $5,000 and beyond. The final cost of your indoor garden depends entirely on:

The number of plants
The total wattage
Equipment
The total cost depends on the number of plants, the total wattage, and the equipment.
Since indoor gardens are entirely dependent on the environment you create, you can’t skimp on the necessary equipment. Simultaneously, as a beginner, you must not dive headfirst into complicated and expensive tools for the garden.

Therefore, you must find a happy medium that maintains a manageable cost while producing a stellar crop of crystal-coated nugs.

Let’s look at the cost of two different examples — a single plant closet grow and a medium-sized grow tent with ten plants to give you an idea of the cost to grow marijuana indoors.

1. The Cost to Grow a Single Plant in a Closet
Feminized cannabis seeds: $65 per 5-pack of seeds (Crop King)
Autoflowering cannabis seeds: $65 per 5-pack seeds (Crop King)
10-Gallon Smart Pot: $25
Sun Gro’s Sunshine Mix Advanced #4 Soilless Blend: $25 per 2.2-cubic feet
Bottled nutrients: $30-60 (1-liter grow and bloom bottles)
Watering can: $15; 2.5-gallon capacity
pH meter: $40
Miscellaneous hardware: $50 (trimming scissors, trellis netting, support pole)
Water: The cost of water will depend on your local water district.
Lighting: $150 (600w LED grow light system)
2-4 months of electricity: $150-300
4″ inline fan and ducting: $40
Hardware to build the grow space: $125
In this case, the example depicts a 3×3′ closet grow that contains a single cannabis plant.

Due to the small space, we opted to harness the efficiency of an LED system. Although the LED is marked as a “600-watt,” — its actual draw is 265-watts.

Furthermore, we decided not to utilize a dedicated hydroponic system to keep the overall cost down. Therefore, the price to grow a single cannabis plant in a 3×3′ closet is roughly $1,000.

2. The Cost to Grow Ten Plants in a Grow Tent
Next, here’s an example of an 8×4′ grow tent that contains ten cannabis plants.

Feminized cannabis seeds: $90-120 per 10-pack of seeds (MSNL, Crop King, ILGM)
Autoflowering cannabis seeds: $90-120 per 10-pack seeds (MSNL, Crop King, ILGM)
(10) 6″ Rockwool Cubes: $80
(2) 3×6′ Flood Trays: $300
Bottled nutrients: $90-120 (4-liter Grow and Bloom bottles)
FloraFlex Rockwool Irrigation Kit: $200
Watering Reservoir: $250; 265-gallon water reservoir
pH meter: $40
EC meter: $100
Miscellaneous hardware: $50 (trimming scissors, trellis netting, PVC support pole)
Water: The cost of water will depend on your local water district.
Lighting: $270; (2) 600-watt HID system (hood, ballast, bulb, timer)
2-4 months of electricity: $400-1,600 (depends on your region)
8″ inline fan with carbon filter and accessories: $150
8×4′ grow tent: $200
Environmental Controller: $40
(Optional) Portable AC Unit: $500
An 8×4′ grow tent increases the number of plants you can grow, but it also allows you to utilize more equipment. In this case, we decided to utilize rockwool cubes’ efficiency and drip irrigation in a drain-to-recycle system.

Overall, the cost of this setup is roughly $2,500. Although $2,500 may sound expensive, you can now grow weed year-round with equipment that will pay for itself throughout each harvest.

As you can see, the cost of electricity varies depending on your region. Some regions are blessed with low power costs, whereas others pay an arm-and-a-leg.

Q: How Much Does It Cost to Grow Weed Indoors?
A: Overall, the cost of growing marijuana indoors ranges from $1,000 to $5,000 and beyond. The final cost of your indoor garden depends entirely on the number of plants, the total wattage, and the equipment.

The Yield of Growing Weed Indoors
Next, it’s time to look at the yield of growing weed indoors. This is the subject that most of you have been waiting for —- and you won’t be disappointed.

Each indoor cannabis strain can pump out between 400-800-grams per meter squared. Once again, the final yield depends on multiple factors, such as:

Genetics
Indoor Environment
Strain Difficulty
The yields depends on genetics, indoor Environment, and strain difficulty
Indoor environments provide all the TLC a cannabis plant could ever dream of — ideal temperatures, calculated doses of nutrients, and uninterrupted light. When you consider this, it’s no wonder why indoor cannabis plants yield truckloads of resin-coated buds.

As long as you choose easy-to-grow feminized or autoflowering seeds — you’ll be surprised by how quickly you’ll feel like a green thumb.

Let’s take a look at potential yields that you can attain within 7-12-weeks of flowering from feminized and autoflowering strains indoors.

Feminized indica: 350-450-grams per meter squared
Feminized hybrid: 400-700-grams per meter squared
Feminized sativa: 400-700-grams per meter squared
Autoflowering indica: 200-300-grams per meter squared
Autoflowering hybrid: 300-400-grams per meter squared
Autoflowering sativa: 200-300-grams per meter squared
It’s essential to note that these are estimated yields. Once you choose a pack of feminized or autoflowering seeds, you may or may not reach the maximum yield.

For example, the Silver Haze Automatic Feminized strain can yield up to 200-300-grams per meter squared. However, your cultivation skills, environment, and underlying genetics will determine the final yield.

Furthermore, you will yield more per plant with feminized seeds. Feminized seeds grow larger than automatic strains, and therefore, produce more weed. However, bigger isn’t always better — especially for indoor growers with limited space.

Alternatively, autoflowering strains are small in stature and produce less bud per plant than feminized strains. However, you can fix this potential yield deficit by adding more automatic plants in the garden.

Q: How Much Does One Marijuana Plant Yields Indoors?
A: Each indoor cannabis plant can yield between 400-800-grams per meter squared.

Total Value For Money and Effort
Now, you must wonder — is it worth it to grow weed indoors?

For most, the answer to this question lies in the final harvest. Generally speaking, the larger the yield, the higher the total value for money and effort spent. However, how can we quantify the total value to see if our efforts are worth the investment of growing cannabis indoors?

Let’s take a brief look at two ideas that you must understand as a budding cannabis cultivator. However, we recommend that you read our full analysis on the topic of How to Increase The Total Value for Money and Effort of Growing Cannabis Indoors (Comming Soon…).

The Golden Ratio of Gram-Per-Watt
Aside from the estimated yield per meter squared, we should also mention the idea of gram-per-watt. Although this concept is not primarily suitable for beginners — it’s worth briefly discussing.

Gram-per-watt is precisely what it sounds like — it’s the calculation of how much weed one watt of light produces. The overarching goal of any indoor cannabis cultivator is to reach the golden ratio — 1g/watt.

However, the average gram-per-watt for beginners is roughly 0.25-0.50g/watt.

Golden Ratio: Gram ÷ Watt = 1

Potential Price Per Gram of Growing Cannabis Indoors
Depending on your inner green thumb, the price per gram of growing weed indoors may vary dramatically.

Let’s take the example discussed above regarding the single plant closet grow. The total cost is roughly $1,000, and depending on the strain, the final yield is 250-grams.

In this case, the cost per gram is $4 per gram. Although this may seem high compared to outdoor gardens, the quality is unlike anything you’ve seen before.

In the second example, the total cost to grow ten plants is estimated at $2,500. Let’s say the final harvest is 1,000-grams; therefore, the price per gram is $2.50.

Ultimately, the price per gram decreases if you choose high-yielding feminized or autoflowering cannabis seeds.

Which Strains Are Best For Growing Weed Indoors?
The next question that bubbles to the surface is what strain should I grow indoors?

There’s no right or wrong answer to this question as long as you follow our criteria on how to choose the best weed strain for your indoor garden.

From body-numbing indicas to mind-blowing sativas and everything in-between, you’ll be floored by the diversity of strains available at your fingertips.

How to Choose The Best Indoor Weed Strain
The criteria to choose the best weed strain indoors is relatively simple:

Indica, sativa, or hybrid?
Are they feminized or autoflowering?
Grow difficulty
Cannabinoid content
Yield potential
Terpene profile
Bag appeal
Overall value
From the buds’ flavor to the overall growing experience, these categories are essential to understand when choosing which strains to grow indoors. Luckily, you can learn how to select the best cannabis strains on our Homepage under step 3, Tab 3.3.

The Best Strains to Grow Indoors For Beginners
There are, however, specific feminized or autoflowering strains that are geared directly for indoor cultivation and beginners.

Here’s a snippet of easy-to-grow marijuana strains for the indoor grow room:

Strawberry Kush
Power Plant
Big Bud
Head over to our full list of The Best Indoor Cannabis Strains and discover genetics that you shouldn’t miss!

What Equipment is Needed to Grow Cannabis Indoors?
Growing weed indoors is highly dependent on various pieces of equipment.

From lighting to airflow, you must harness various tools to mimic the great outdoors. By using high-quality tools, your indoor marijuana garden will be healthy and productive with each subsequent cycle.

Here’s a checklist of essential pieces of equipment for your indoor garden:

HID, LED, or plasma lighting
Grow tent (or DIY grow room)
Environmental controllers and timers
Lighting accessories (hangers, lamp cords, PAR meter)
Hydroponic medium (if you choose to grow with hydroponics)
Flood table or tray
Soil (if you decide to grow indoors with soil)
pH and EC meters
Bottled Nutrients
Feminized or autoflowering seeds
Irrigation kit (or watering can if hand watering)
Water reservoir
Trimming scissors or pruning shears
Support Poles and trellis netting
Grow tent (if you do not build the grow room)
Organic insect and disease control
Ventilation equipment and accessories
Carbon filter
Oscillating fan(s)
Here’s a list of additional items that may enhance your indoor cannabis garden:

CO2
Drying equipment
RO system
Air conditioner
Dehumidifier
Humidifier
Trimming machine
Should You Build a Grow Room or Buy a Grow Tent?
Next, you must determine where you’re going to grow weed indoors.

You have two options:

Grow tent
DIY grow room
Both of these options present pros and cons, and it’s up to you to determine which route to take. Here are the key takeaways to decide whether you should build a grow room or buy a grow tent:

Grow tents can be set up within minutes
DIY grow rooms are customizable but require technical know-how
Regardless of your choice, we’re here to help you set up the best indoor cannabis grow room possible. In the next section, you’ll discover how to set up your indoor cannabis garden in a handful of easy-to-follow steps.

Grow Room vs Grow Tent
Grow Room vs Grow Tent

How Do You Setup an Indoor Cannabis Garden?
Many newbies become nervous at the mention of setting up their indoor grow room.

We understand there isn’t a reliable source on setting up an indoor cannabis garden for dummies — until now.

All indoor cannabis gardens have a specific flow, and as a beginner, you must ensure everything is set up correctly before growing cannabis plants in the garden.

Here’s our full guide on How to Set Up an Indoor Cannabis Grow Room in Ten Easy Steps to make your life easier.

However, here’s the basic flow to follow when learning how to set up your cannabis garden:

Step 1: Determine a Suitable Area to Grow Marijuana Indoors

Step 2: Choose the Best Cannabis Seeds for Your Grow Room

Step 3: Choose to Build the Grow Room or Buy a Grow Tent

Step 4: Choose Your Marijuana Grow Lights

Step 5: Determine Number of Plants in the Garden

Step 6: Decide Between Hydroponics or Soil

Step 7: Provide Proper Air Flow for the Indoor Environment

Step 8: Incorporate an Irrigation Strategy

Step 9: Plan an IPM Strategy

Step 10: Test the Indoor Environment and Start the Garden

As you can imagine, each indoor cannabis grow room is different. Whereas one marijuana cultivator grows in a closet and another in a garage, the overall setup will be different.

How Do You Grow Marijuana Indoors?
Growing marijuana indoors is easy if you follow the golden rule — KISS (keep it simple, stupid).

Here’s a general step-by-step process from seed to harvest.

Step 1: Germinate Cannabis Seeds
The first step is to germinate your feminized or autoflowering seeds. Although germination is a bit tricky, we created an easy-to-follow guide on How to Germinate Cannabis Seeds.

Seed germination is the beginning of your journey in the world of marijuana. Once you learn what germination is and how to accomplish it, it’s time to discover advanced germination techniques, such as:

How to germinate cannabis seeds with paper towels
How to germinate cannabis seeds with rooting cubes
After 3-7-days, the seedlings will begin their journey and start to reach for the light.

Paper Towel and Rooting Cubes Germination Techniques
Paper Towel and Rooting Cubes Germination Techniques

Step 2: Transplant Cannabis Seedlings
Next, you must transplant the cannabis seedlings.

In this step, you will place the seedling into a new home, such as:

Containers filled with soil or soilless medium
Hydroponic systems
Transplanting may seem like a daunting task initially. Instead of fumbling in the dark, follow our guide on How to Transplant Cannabis Seedlings in Five Easy Steps.

Step 3: Plant Care and Maintenance During The Vegetative Phase
Cannabis plants excel indoors under the 18/6 or 24/0 light schedule.

At this point, your cannabis plant will rapidly produce new stems, leaves, and root growth. Known as the vegetative stage, you must perform regular plant maintenance to ensure your garden doesn’t turn into a jungle.

Here are a few methods to employ during the vegetative phase:

Regularly measure EC/PPM/pH
When it comes to growing marijuana indoors, most beginners find trouble with pH, PPM, and EC.

Luckily for you, we’ve covered each of these topics:

Why You Need to Use a pH Meter
Why You Need to Use a Nutrient Meter
How to calibrate and use pH meters
How to calibrate and use EC/PPM meters
Train the cannabis plant(s)
Training allows cannabis cultivators to adjust plant size and increase the overall yield of marijuana plants. Overall, manipulation is the key, whether it requires you to cut off a section of the plant or bend it to promote a specific reaction.

As you’ll soon find out in our Encyclopedia of Training Methods, you’ll discover how to:

ScrOG
SOG
Top
FIM
LST
Follow the nutrient guide’s dosage regimen
Once it’s time to feed your cannabis plants, you must follow the directions of the nutrient brand of your choosing. As you’ll learn, our guide on How to Feed Cannabis Plants With Bottled Nutrients (Comming Soon…) will make your life easier.

You’ll learn how to:

Interpret a nutrient feeding chart
Understand the nutrient ratio
How to mix nutrients
Continuously monitor the plant(s)
Half of the battle of growing weed is monitoring.

Remember, big things have small beginnings; therefore, you must pay attention to every detail. We’ll assist you along the way in the form of The Ultimate Guide of Plant Monitoring During The Vegetative Stage (Comming Soon…).

You’ll learn how to:

Determine the sex of your plant
Troubleshoot your cannabis plants
Search for pests and diseases
Decide when it’s time to flower the crop
Determine the overall health of the crop
Ensure an adequate watering schedule
Watering cannabis plants isn’t as simple as it seems.

Keep your cannabis plants happy and hydrated by reading our Ultimate Guide on Irrigation for Cannabis Plants (Comming Soon…). You’ll avoid all of the mistakes that beginners typically make once you’re done reading this insightful guide.

Plant Care and Maintenance During The Vegetative Phase
At this point, your cannabis plant will rapidly produce new stems, leaves, and root growth.

Step 4: The 12/12 Schedule and The Beginning of The Flowering Phase
If you’re satisfied with the size of your cannabis plants, it’s time to move ahead with the all-important 12/12 light schedule.

The 12/12 light schedule triggers the flowering stage in marijuana plants and is a significant milestone for each cannabis cultivator.

Once you’ve read our guide on How to Set The Grow Lights to The 12/12 Schedule (Comming Soon…), your cannabis plants will begin to enter the flowering stage within a few days.

Here’s a list of crucial information regarding the flowering process:

The flowering stage begins with the pre-flowering stage
After the pre-flowering stage, cannabis plants are in full bloom
Cannabis plants in flower require specific nutrient compositions for an optimized yield
Cannabis plants may flower for 7-12-weeks depending on strain
Ensure the grow room or grow tent is light-leak free
Ensure the grow lights turn and off at the designated intervals
12/12 Light Schedule
The 12/12 light schedule triggers the flowering stage in marijuana plants.

Step 5: Plant Care and Maintenance During The Flowering Phase
The flowering phase is the most exciting stage for new and professional marijuana growers alike.

However, you must ensure the marijuana plants receive optimal care during this critical stage in their life. Here are a few ideas to enhance your indoor cannabis garden during the flowering stage:

Lollipop the plant(s)
Lollipopping the cannabis plant at the beginning of the flowering phase is necessary for improved health, airflow, pest and disease resistance, and an increased yield.

Read our in-depth guide on How to Lollipop Cannabis Plants to ensure you do it right.

Follow the nutrient regimen of your “bloom” nutrients
Similar to grow nutrients, bloom nutrients are composed of specific nutrient ratios to boost the final yield.

Our Guide on Bloom Nutrients (Comming Soon…) will help you understand how and when to use them. From bloom boosters to ideal nutrient ratios, you’ll discover everything you need to know to push your indoor weed crop to the limit.

Regularly measure EC/PPM/pH
During the flowering phase, a cannabis plant’s appetite is subject to change. Therefore, you’ll need to pay close attention to the pH and nutrient content during this critical period of your cannabis plant’s life.

Read our comprehensive guides on:

The Best pH Range For Flowering Cannabis Plants (Comming Soon…)
The Best EC/PPM Range For Cannabis Plants in The Flowering Stage (Comming Soon…)
The Ultimate Guide On Flushing Cannabis Plants During The Flowering Stage
Monitor the crop daily
The flowering stage is crucial because so much is changing. As the pistils emerge and the cannabis plant grows in size, you may find yourself with a full-time job as you care for your crop.

Read our inspection guide — The Beginner’s Ultimate Guide on Monitoring Cannabis Plants in The Flowering Stage (Comming Soon…),  where you’ll learn how to check for hermaphrodites, monitor bud growth, and much more. Our inspection guide has it all, and you’ll soon discover what to look for as you gaze over your indoor cannabis crop daily.

Supporting Your Cannabis Crop
As the cannabis plant produces flowers, the accumulated weight may present a new danger for the branches. The last thing you want is broken branches, which is why we’ve made a guide on How to Support Your Cannabis Crop (Comming Soon…) with trellis netting or support poles.

Adjust the height of the grow lights
Ever wonder how high your grow lights should be? You can now breathe easy once you’ve read our guide on How to Set The Perfect Height for Your Grow Lights (Comming Soon…) to get the most giant buds possible.

Ensure adequate watering schedule
The flowering cycle is the full-steam-ahead moment of the cannabis plant. In other words, it’s using all available resources to push out glistening buds. Therefore, you must learn how to implement an adequate watering schedule during the flowering phase (Comming Soon…).

Perform a “flush” during the last 1-2-weeks of flowering
A flush is the removal of excess salt buildup from the medium. Read our guide to discover The Benefits of Flushing, along with how to flush your cannabis plants before harvest properly.

Cannabis Flowering Stage
The flowering phase is the most exciting stage for new and professional marijuana growers alike.

Step 6: Determine Trichome Ripeness
After 6-8-weeks, cannabis buds will begin to stack on the weight and produce thick resin glands. It’s at this point that you must determine the optimal harvest window.

Follow these steps, so you don’t harvest too early or too late:

Check the breeder or seed bank’s estimated flowering time for the particular strain
Check if the pistils are mostly orange
Use a loupe and check if most of the trichomes are milky or cloudy in color
Remember, mostly milky and cloudy trichomes are a dead giveaway for ripe weed. Therefore, follow our guide on How to Check Trichome Ripeness to ensure the most potent bud possible.

Step 7: Harvest the Cannabis Flowers
Harvest day is better than every holiday combined.

After months of labor, your cannabis flowers are ready for harvest. Here’s a wrap-up of our in-depth guide on How to Harvest Cannabis Flowers:

Stop feeding and watering the cannabis plants
Allow the cannabis plants to remain in total darkness for 24-48-hours
Cut the base of the plant and hang it upside down in the grow room
Step 8: Manicure and Dry The Cannabis Flowers
Now, this is the sticky part of growing weed.

It’s time to learn from our guide on How to Dry and Trim Your Harvested Weed Flowers.

Allow the hanging plants to dry for 2-7-days, depending on environmental conditions
Remove the large fan leaves first
Use fine trimming scissors to remove secondary fan leaves
Perform a final manicure
Place into a cardboard box or brown paper bag for 24-48-hours
Step 9: Cure The Weed
One of the final steps of harvesting cannabis indoors is to cure the weed.

Like fine wines, cannabis must undergo a curing process to elevate its aroma, flavor, and potency.

Use our guide on How to Cure Weed to transform mediocre buds to pure fire.

You’ll need:

Glass jars
Boveda (or similar) humidity packs
Patience
Remember, you spent the last handful of months tirelessly working to grow cannabis indoors, so what’s an extra 1-2-weeks?

Step 10: Store The Weed
You’ve officially grown weed at home!

The last step is to stash your weed in a suitable home. Similar to how there’s an app for everything, here’s our step-by-step guide on How to Store Weed.

Here’s a snippet of storage containers that are suitable for storing weed:

Glass jar
Weed-specific container
Vacuum-sealed bag
Storing Your Weed
Congrats! You’ve officially grown weed at home!

Now, it’s time to indulge.

Homegrown weed is everything you hoped it would be — aromatic, flavorful, and it knocks your socks off. Homegrown buds are unforgettable because you put in the hard work.

You’ve come a long way from zero to cannabis hero by following our step-by-step guides on growing weed indoors.

Growing Marijuana Indoors: A Step by Step Guide for Beginners
GROWING
Last Updated May 4, 2020
Person wearing white gloves checking a cannabis plant in an indoor weed farm background
 0
 Share
As the recreational use of marijuana becomes increasingly legal across the U.S, so does the home growing of it.

Growing cannabis isn’t rocket science. But there is a lot of information you need to know to do it successfully.

Whether marijuana is your medication, your pastime, or a new profession, our guide aims to provide you with thorough information. From setting up your station to nourishing the plants as they bloom, growing marijuana indoors can be a worthwhile journey, and we will guide you through it.

Sort Your Space
An indoor weed farm with multiple cannabis plants in a yellow light setting

So, in case it wasn’t obvious, you can’t just plant cannabis seeds in a pot and some soil and wait for it to grow. Growing marijuana indoors can be done in multiple ways and spaces. These include a grow room, a grow tent, or greenhouses.

First, consider the amount of room you’re going to need, then plan accordingly. It’s best to start small. There is a learning curve that is inevitably involved when growing cannabis, and as such, there’s likely to be some mistakes made, says Marijuana Break.

Grow Room
Your grow room doesn’t have to be an entire room; it can be a designated space wherever you can find one! Preferably on your property. Living rooms, bedrooms, garages, and an attic can all work as long as you can fit everything you’re going to need. As well, you want to make sure it is clean, ventilated, and the right temperature (we’ll get to this later).

As mentioned, grow spaces don’t have to take up the whole room. Corners, closets, cupboards, and unused rooms can be excellent grow areas as well.

Grow Tent
These are some of the easiest ways to grow cannabis inside. Designed for this purpose, grow tents come almost entirely ready and suitable to get growing. The pre-designed feature is especially handy if they come with ready-to-grow kits, too.

You can find grow tents most commonly online. Just make sure you’re spending your money wisely and appropriately.

Greenhouse
A greenhouse is a way of growing inside, outside. This structure will work best if you live somewhere with a reliable and ideal climate. You will need to tweak your greenhouse if you want anything to prosper. You can find out more about this as you keep reading.

Ensure Optimum Conditions
Cannabis plant inside an indoor growing house

Cannabis growing requires the right conditions. Too much light, not enough nutrients, temperatures a few degrees off – all of these can lead to a failed batch. Make sure you provide optimal conditions by monitoring these factors:

Light
Lighting control is an essential factor in these plants. They do not require constant light as they must have some periods of darkness or ‘rest time.’ Avoid light leaks wherever they are growing. The lighting that your plants will be receiving will be artificial and controlled by you. Make sure to black out any nearby windows nearby. The same goes for if you’re using a greenhouse.

If your plants are exposed to light when they shouldn’t be, they will get confused and start producing male flowers. Male flowers are not desirable for cannabis growers and can create accidental pollination of buds.

Temperature
Like any plant, cannabis requires the right temperature to live. I Love Growing Marijuana states that, initially, with lighting, seedlings need an environmental temperature between 68ºF and 77ºF (20ºC and 25ºC). As they get older, is increases to 82ºF (28ºC). They also recommend when the lights are off, the temperature should be between 59ºF and 72ºF (15ºC and 22ºC).

Ensure it’s generally warm in the designated area but not too hot.

Space
The space you will need for growing marijuana indoors will include not only the plants themselves but also ducting, fans, lights, and other equipment, too. Also, pot can double or even triple in size when growing, so you’ll need to anticipate this.

Allow for around one square foot per plant. You must remember that you won’t be starting with a factory-style quantity. Get to grips with the growing process before you go large.

Cleanliness
Providing a clean space for your marijuana plants is crucial. Cannabis is a bio-accumulator. This term means marijuana absorbs elements or chemicals – like heavy metals – from its environment, explains Encore Labs. So, keep everything clean and free of contaminants.

Not only is it critical to make the area initially spotless, but clean around the plants weekly to ensure the hygiene is maintained throughout.

Convenience and Privacy
You should be checking the plants almost every day. As such, it’s best to grow them in a place that’s easy for you to access. According to Leafly, beginners will ideally need to check-in several times a day.

It will also work in your favor to keep your potted pals away from neighbors or unwanted visitors. There’s potential for theft if someone can see you’re growing marijuana.

Let in the Light
A cannabis indoor farm with professional lighting

You’ve heard of photosynthesis, right? Well, this is what your plants will be doing if they are growing successfully. As they will not have natural light, artificial light is what you’ll be needing to provide.

Grow Lights
The light you use to grow your cannabis is one of the most critical factors. Lighting will be the component in which you will want to invest the majority of your money. Your light source also can be a good source of warmth for the marijuana. There are different types of light you can use to ensure the best conditions.

Light Emitting Diode (LED)
LED lights are highly efficient grow lights. They don’t consume as much energy and don’t create too much heat. They generally lead to better quality plants and higher yields and generate more wavelengths over the spectrum of light.

The drawback is that they cost almost ten times more than a good HID setup, says Marijuana Break. However, if you’re willing to splash the cash, this might be your best option. Just be careful you don’t buy any fake LED lights, which are prevalent online.

High-Intensity Discharge (HID) Lights
These are the most commonly used lights for growing marijuana indoors. They provide an intense amount of light (who would have guessed?), ideal for growing big and healthy plants. You can buy these in a range of wattage, depending on your growing needs.

High-Pressure Sodium (HPS) and Metal Halide (MH) are your standard entry-level lights. MH provides and blue/white toned light, which is ideal for the early stages. HPS emits a red/orange toned light, which is best suited to the flowering stages of cannabis.
400 watts will suit up to three plants in a 3x3ft area
600 watts are ideal for up to 4 plants in a 5×5 area
1000 watts is the strongest of the standard lights and can aid in growing up to 6 plants in a 6×6 space.
Fluorescent Lights
These aren’t great for energy consumption. However, like LED lights, they don’t produce much heat. Therefore, they won’t dehydrate your plants too much. Their varied spectrum allows for an optimal growing environment throughout the different stages of growth.

They don’t allow for a massive yield of weed, but they are ideal for those growing marijuana as a hobby or low-scale personal use.

Induction Grow Lights
These are a more energy-efficient and durable version of fluorescent lights. These are hard to find, though, and are of limited availability.

How to Regulate Light for Your Pot
When growing marijuana indoors, you want the light supply to be on for around 16-20 hours a day. The duration matters, especially in the early stages. Once the cannabis starts to flower, the light should be on for 12 hours a day and off for the other 12.

You can adjust this yourself if you can find not only the spare time but the correct time each day. If not, this is when a light timer will come in handy.

Grow Medium – Hydroponics vs. Soil
Inside a cannabis indoor grow tent with five cannabis plants a fan and hydropolic system

Now that you’ve sorted our your lighting system, you’ll need to decide on the medium in which you want to cultivate your plants. There are two options: soil and hydroponics.

Soil is the recommended material to get your cannabis blooming, especially for first-time growers. Soil is readily available, easier to use, cheaper, and things are less likely to go wrong with it. You don’t need any fancy soil, however. Pre-fertilized soil is the best option.

Pre-fertilized soil can grow cannabis from beginning to end without any extra added nutrients if used correctly. You can make this yourself by combining bat guano, worm castings, and other ingredients with a nourishing soil, says Leafly.

So, let’s have a look at hydroponics. What is hydroponics? Hydroponic comes from the Latin words ‘working’ and ‘water.’ It is the art of how to grow plants without any soil, to paraphrase Simply Hydroponics. With this process, the plants can receive nutrients and water through water flow and drainage systems.

There is a variety of available materials to use as a soil-substitute for hydroponics. Soil substitutes include vermiculite, Rockwool, coco coir, perlite, and expanded pebbles. Rockwool is a material that many commercial growers consider to be the best substrate for this kind of production. Rockwool holds water and retains the right amount of air space due to its unique build, says GPN Mag.

The benefits of a hydroponic system are that nutrients absorb more quickly through osmosis, and it can result in larger yield. Commercial hydroponic mixes will contain the ideal amount of nutrients for your marijuana plants. Nevertheless, you must keep in mind that these systems are expensive, and plants can react rapidly to over or underfeeding.

Equipment
So, you’ve seen we have mentioned growing equipment a couple of times now, but what does that entail? Once you’ve decided on your medium, there’s still more to think about and purchase! Fear not, we’ve listed some of the extra pieces of equipment you’ll need for growing marijuana indoors.

Fresh Air Source
Like any other living and growing thing, weed plants need a flow of fresh air to survive. You can use an oscillating fan within the grow space or an exhaust fan placed at the top of the room. Using a filtered air inlet on the other side of the room on the floor also will be beneficial to keep fresh, cool, and circulating.

You can use a charcoal filter in your fan to mask the smell of the pot if that’s going to be an issue where you are. Remember, although they need fresh air, you must try and maintain the recommended temperature for the plants. Temperature ranges should be 75-85ºF with the lights on and 55-75ºF with the lights off.

Thermo-Hygrometer
You will need a device to monitor the temperature within your grow space. You can get a basic thermostat for your grow room, but thermo-hygrometer works better. This device measures both humidity and temperature.

Humidity is a tricky one when cultivating cannabis. The Cannabis Business Times explains that dry conditions, as well as low humidity levels, create inviting environments for pests like spider mites. They also found in a study that for clone rooms, 19 percent of research participants said the ideal humidity level is 56%-60%.

Test Kit or pH Meter
These devices help with checking the pH level of your water solution or soil. In soil, marijuana needs a pH of around 6-7 and between 5.5-6.5 with a hydroponic method.

If the pH level gets out of the optimum range, your plants might go into something called a lock-out. In this condition, the plants won’t be able to absorb the nutrients they require. So, make sure to test regularly!

Container
The container you choose will depend on the medium you’re using and how much you intend to grow. If you’re using soil, then a five or ten-gallon bucket will be your best option. Make sure that whatever pot or bucket you pot it in, there are holes at the bottom to ensure airflow. Marijuana plants are sensitive to waterlogged conditions. You can purchase smart pots that allow aeration for your greenery.

If you’re opting for hydroponics, a flood-and-drain tray filled with Rockwool or clay pebbles is the best way to go.

Now to Get Creative
Find Your Strain
If you’re reading through this guide, you probably know how many varieties of pot there are. Choosing the strain(s) you want for growing marijuana indoors depends on what you want out of it. You’ll want to look into a seed bank or trusted breeders who can provide you with the right strain of weed that you’re seeking.

There are three main types of strains: sativa, indica, and auto-flowering strains. These all produce different kinds of highs and have various benefits. The selection of any strain depends on the reasons for which you’re using or selling it.

Let’s look at the criteria of each of the three main strains:

Sativa: Sativa plants are more resistant to heat but cannot manage with cold temperatures. They grow into tall, long buds. Their effect is more of a head high that feels easy and upbeat.
Indica: These strains will be better in cold, opposed to hot temperatures. They grow into short and dense buds. Their effect is more of a body high that is heavier and more relaxing.
Auto-flowering strains: These derive their name because they do not require a light switch in the flowering stage. They flower automatically. They tend to be a hybrid of Sativa and Indica and small in size. They have a shorter cycle, which makes them suitable if you’re just starting with growing marijuana.
Looking online for your desired strain is not much different from clothes shopping. A good breeder should have the product specification listed and the features of the strain.

Male and Female Plants
It may seem odd, but cannabis plants are gendered, just like us! It’s worth mentioning because you want to make sure your crop is not a male plant. It is only the female crop that can produce potent buds, says Marijuana break. Only the female plant will get you high. The male plant contains seeds, and you’ll want to keep it away from the females.

If the female plants manage to get pollinated by the males, then they, too, will produce seeds and be redundant for providing the kind of pot you want.

So, how can you tell the difference? Male marijuana flowers produce small bell shapes that hang down while females create tear-shaped flowers with two pistils. These are usually white, Alchimia explains.

This situation is when choosing clones over seeds might be more beneficial for growers. It reduces the chances of coming across unexpected and unwanted male plants.

How to Care for Your Plants as They Grow
You’ve got your grow room and lights sorted. The conditions are just right, and your plant is now ready to sprout. Now, you’ve got to make sure you look after them as they grow.

Pot isn’t like most other plants and will take a bit more than a splash of water here and there to bloom. Growing marijuana indoors means you will require a good load of fertilizer and nutrients for your greenery. There are seven top nutrients – or micronutrients – that your crop will require:

Potassium
Calcium
Nitrogen
Magnesium
Phosphorus
Copper
Iron
If you’re already using the nutrient-rich ‘super-soil,’ then you don’t need to worry too much about feeding your plant more of these. If you’re not, then you can usually find these packed into a liquid or powder form. Mix these nutrients with water and use them on your plants at least once a week. Do not overfeed as this can damage the crop.

Some plants also need more magnesium and calcium than others. As such, you may need extra of these nutrients. You will get to know your plants as you go through the process, so don’t get too hung up on perfect measures.

Water
Cannabis plants love water like any other plant. However, again, like any other plant, do not over-water them! There’s no specific amount set for watering marijuana. It’s good to try some commonsense and evaluate day-to-day what your plant needs. Don’t let it get too dry but don’t water it more than once or twice a day, max. The amount of water necessary also will depend on the size of your plants.

Just ensure the leaves don’t start drooping. If the soil (if you’re using soil) feels dry to touch, then you’ll need to moisten it with water. Remember, weed that has been grown indoors in the soil will not get any rain so that you will be its only provider of H2O.

If you’re using hydroponics, the game is a bit different. Check the feed lines and pumps regularly. The reservoir should contain oxygenated water and be free of pathogens, says Zamnesia. Ensure you also get nutrients to your plants through this system, too.

Last But Not Least – Harvest
Person wearing blue and black gloves cutting a cannabis bud with an orange scissor

Once your plant has seen through all it’s growth stages, which are:

Germination
Seedling phase
Vegetative phase
Pre-flowering
Flowering and fruition
It’s now time for the bit you’ve been awaiting: harvest.

Cannabis takes around three months to flourish fully, and there will be specific indicators that it’s ready for use. The plant’s growth will have slowed down if not halted. The trichomes, which are the delicate hairs found on the buds, will have turned from white to brown. This characteristic may be new to first-time growers, but long-time smokers will be familiar with aesthetically. You will also notice the aroma is strong.

Cutting
You should note that you can’t just snip at these little buds and crush them up straight into a joint. You have to be meticulous and careful with trimming your plant. Chop branch by branch or the entire thing by the stem.

Keeping the branch intact, you will want to get rid of the water leaves. These are the leaves that are the pot symbol. Once removed, you can focus on the smaller sugar leaves. While not everyone cuts these off, it will make your batch purely nugget based.

Top tip: Sugar leaves can be put to the side and used to make hash, hash butter, or wax as they are brimming with THC.

Drying
Drying is simple and can occur in the room where they were initially grown. Just make sure the area is dark and warm. A temperature between 60-70° F (or 16-21° C) is optimal for drying. Allow a moderate amount of humidity, too. An atmosphere that is too dry will result in a rapid drying process and, therefore, a harsher smoke.

This process takes around 7-12 days, depending on the bud size. Royal Queens Seeds explains that there is a straightforward test to know if the buds are dry. Take a little branch and bend it. If it snaps, the buds are dry enough.

Curing
Curing involves storing the weed in an airtight jar for up to thirty days. Store these at the same temperature as when drying the buds. Curing helps break down the chlorophyll. Imagine when a wine is aged to make it taste better—that’s what curing is!

Wrap Up
And there you have it: your all-you-need-to-know guide to growing marijuana indoors. The process can be enjoyable and educational. Growing can give the pot lovers a whole new experience with their beloved green good stuff.

Learning the steps of growing weed indoors for beginners is fun and rewarding, but can also be challenging. The key essentials encompass a certain amount of patience, time, and a bit of money. But hey, we’ll walk you through the growing process step-by-step, from preparation, to seed germination, plant growth, and harvesting, in addition to best practices.

How to Properly Grow Weed Indoors
To learn how to grow the best weed indoors, consider these factors when:

Light: Cannabis is a photoperiod plant, meaning the daily amount of light will determine when and if it flowers. Indoors, you can control the lighting schedule by changing your artificial light.
Water: Cannabis plants need water – and the right amount thereof.
Nutrients: Marijuana plants need nutrients in order to grow into their optimum selves.
Temperature and humidity: Be sure to provide an environment with optimal temperature and humidity that will allow your cannabis to thrive. Generally, this is between 55-85°F, with a relative humidity of 50-70%.
Wind/airflow: Weed plants need proper airflow, which can be simulated indoors with oscillating fans. With that said, we can move on to all the necessary equipment and supplies that you’ll need to grow weed indoors.
Deciding whether you will grow in soil or use a hydroponic setup (Please see more on this in a separate section followingly).
What You’ll Need to Grow Marijuana Indoors
Quality cannabis seeds
Grow room or tent
Carbon filter
Grow lights (See below section for more information)
Ventilation (Fans)
Pots or containers
Growing medium (Depending on your setup)
Nutrients
Thermometer
PH meter
How to Choose Your Cannabis Grow Lights
The light source you use in your indoor growing operation is pivotal to your overall success and the quality of your yield. We recommend spending the biggest portion of you budget on a good lighting setup – as it’s totally worth it in the end. Here follows a summary of your indoor lighting choices to grow proper buds with:

LED Grow Lights
LED lighting is the number 1 suggested type of lighting for indoor marijuana growers. Highly efficient for indoor growing, LED lights use less energy and emit a low amount of heat. LEDs emit the entire light-spectrum; thus, they can be used for the vegetative and flowering stages of a cannabis plant’s lifecycle.

CFL Lights
CFL lights are cheap and ideal to use if you just need a few ounces of bud here and there. CFL’s are great to use for seedling growth and are known as a “low-maintenance” way for you to grow weed indoors. Even as beginner grower, you can safely expect to get 1-3 ounces of dried buds per plant if you just follow the instructions given in this article on growing weed indoors for beginners.

Growing Weed Indoors for Beginners Step by Step
Step 1: Decide on Soil vs. Soilless Growing
Soil offers a high margin of error; however, you need to carefully select the soil you use for growing marijuana indoors. You want to use a high-grade horticultural potting mix, which is light and airy, charged with a bit of nutrients to get you through the first few weeks.

Other mixes are neutral, without any nutrients present, in which case it will need appropriate amounts of fertilizer right from the start. Additives to soil include compost as well as other organic compost nutrients.

Another idea is the automated hydroponic setup system, which may help you experience faster growth and more abundant yields. This is only the case if everything is done correctly – all the time, every time.  A hydroponic system delivers all necessary mineral salt nutrients to plants in water.

If you want to choose hydroponic over traditional soil, there are several advantages. Make you pick from the Ebb and Flow, Flood and drain and DWC systems. Please see more on these methods in the following section.

Step 2: Germination & Planting
You will want to check to make sure your chosen seed is viable before planting it. So you will need to germinate your seed. Start by taking a clear plastic bag with a damp paper towel and fold your seed in the paper towel, close the bag and put it somewhere slightly warm. After a few days, you’ll see a small white tail poking out. This means your seedling is ready for planting.

Step 3: Planting
Get your potting mix on with some good ground soil, mixed with your selection of perlite, vermiculite and compost. Plant your seeds in appropriately sized pots about 1 inch deep with your exposed tail pointing down, then slightly mist the top of the container with clean water and put it somewhere it can get some direct light from a grow light.

Step 4: Develop a Control System and Monitor the Growing Process
The next step is a self-monitoring system to control it all. Assuming you can’t spend the whole day in your growing space, you need a 24-hour timer and an adjustable thermostat. The latter allows you to set your exhaust fan to switch on once temperatures go above a certain point. The result is a stable temperature range and humidity level while saving energy and money.

The 24-hour timer is similarly important to manage. When the marijuana plants are in vegetative growth, you need the light supply on for a maximum of 24 hours per day. Once they reach the flowering stage, they need 12 hours light and 12 hours dark.

Step 5: Show Your Cannabis Plants Some Love, Water & Nutrients
Ensuring your plants get enough nutrients is second only to lighting in terms of importance. Proper nutrient application is among the most critical factors in growing premium-grade cannabis. Whether you’re using an organic soil mix or growing hydroponically, your cannabis needs the following macronutrients:

Nitrogen (N)
Phosphorous (P)
Potassium (K)
Calcium (Ca
Magnesium (Mg)
The Final Step: Harvesting!
The final step involves harvesting your plants. Once you get used to the process, you’ll find it more enjoyable than tedious.

Growing Weed Indoors with a Hydroponic Setup
You need the following factors in place in order to complete your hydroponic setup:

Grow Environment – We recommend a grow tent as opposed to building your own environment from scratch.
Grow Light – If you don’t already have a grow light, we recommend getting a 250W, 400W or 600W grow light for your first grow. They are the most consistent type of grow light and get really great results in DWC.
Nutrients – I highly recommend getting GH Flora trio, Calimagic (Cal-Mag supplement) and Hydroguard.
Seeds – Learn where to get seeds
DWC tank – Learn how to build your own (it’s surprisingly hard to find a pre-made tank considering how cheap all the parts are!)
Wrapping Up How to Grow Weed Indoors for Beginners
Congratulations for getting this far! If you haven’t harvested your first batch of home-grown indoor weed yet, we’re sure you’re getting closer to the prize. Just remember to clean your grow room, because cleanliness ensures your product always turns out the best it can be. Happy indoor growing!

Cannabis a strong, hardy, fast-growing plant … (4 months and you have a harvest)
Cannabis will grow under not so ideal conditions
The equipment needed can be bought legally (Amazon and others)
Big rewards, because you won’t need to spend money on Marijuana
Don’t rely on a shady character to supply this to you ever again
Marijuana Grow Box Complete Set
What do you need to Grow Cannabis Indoors?
⬆ back to overview

Build A Grow Tent
Everything happens inside the grow tent.

cannabis grow tents
The grow tent is a big box that you can close with a Zipper. Everything happens inside.

The bright light will stay inside it.

Grow tents also let you filter the old air …. and remove the cannabis scent to stay discreet (more on that later on this page).

But honestly, you don’t HAVE to use a grow tent.

You could also grow without a tent. For example inside a cabinet, wardrobe or little storage room.


Grow tents come in different sizes.

→Click here to chose the right grow tent for your space. (You will stay on my website)

⬆ back to overview

Where to set up your Grow Tent?

Your indoor setup will ideally be placed:

in a closet
in a garage
a cellar
the attic
or your garden shed
You could put it into your living- / bed room … but the fan makes some noise.

Make sure nobody else can access the place. Be very discreet with your setup, nobody should really know about this. Even if it’s legal where you live, there still may people try and steal your harvest.


New! Super Discreet, complete Mini Cannabis Grow Box available here. View

You will need electricity and a window or a vent for air exchange.

The temperature should not be below 53F / 12C or it all gets too cold (you need a heater).

Above 86F / 30C is too warm.

⬆ back to overview

LED Grow Lights
Cannabis needs lots of light. The more the better!

LED Grow Light made by HLG
HLG 550 LED Grow Light
In nature, Cannabis plants want full sunlight.

No electric light is as strong or as colorful as the sun. But LED Lights work very well.

LED lights are the best for Home Growers because they use the least electricity and produce the least amount of heat. They also grow excellent plants. So on this website, I focus on LED Lights.


There are different size LED lamps available.

The bigger your grow tent, the bigger the LED light needs to be.

Click here to chose the right LED Grow light (You will stay on this website)

⬆ back to overview

Ventilation, Airflow, and Smell Removal
Cannabis needs fresh air to grow properly. The weed also smells (nicely) once its flowering.

Also, you need to get rid of old used air. For example out of a window or vent.

The carbon filter will remove the typical Marijuana smell so other people won’t have to smell it.

The Ventilation Fan
It looks like this: (if you’re confused about how to use it, please keep reading … there will be a video).


Video: How to use the ventilation fan in a grow tent

⬆ back to overview

How to remove the smell?
Cannabis has a strong (delicious), smell when it goes into flower. The smell starts at the age of 4-6 weeks.

The smell is usually the reason why grow operations fail to stay undercover. The neighbors complain.

Even if you’re in a place where all of this is legal, you still may want to get rid of the smell and stay discreet. After all, your harvest could be worth $1.000sands of dollars and it’s better to not flaunt that.

So we need to use an air filter to remove the smell.

Carbon Filter to remove Marijuana smell
Those Carbon Air filters have activated charcoal in them.

The air from inside your grow tent is pulled through this filter, and the smell (most of it) gets removed.

The filters don’t always work 100% reliable. Its an organic process.

carbon filter in tent
how a carbon air filter works
To make the filters work well and really remove the smell, the air needs to travel slowly through them. Then the carbon has enough time to filter the organic smells.

If your fan is running full spedd and your filter is too small, it won’t filter much.

So if in doubt, use a bigger filter. And always use a speed-controlled fan.

Click here to chose the right size fan. (You will stay on my website).

Click here to chose the right sized Carbon Smell Filter. (You will stay on my website).

⬆ back to overview

Pots for your Plants
Now you need pots to grow your plants in.

There are Plastic Pots, Fabric Pots, and Air Pots.


Plastic Pots are the standard everybody has been using forever. They are super cheap. Unfortunately, they don’t let air penetrate and your plant roots have less oxygen available. You should avoid using these.

Fabric Pots are made from … fabric 😲. The fabric is breathable …. so oxygen can reach the roots of your plant and it will grow well. The problem is that they are prone to over-watering. Because they stand on the ground and excess water can not drain easily.

Air Pots are the latest development. They are great because they let oxygen reach the roots so the plants are happy. Air Pots also have space between the soil and the ground … which means excess water can drip away at the bottom. Even if you over-water your plants it’s not a problem. Because the excess water just drains out. Unfortunately, these are difficult to find and more expensive.

Summary: if you can, buy Air Pots. if not, fabric pots will do.

Find the right Pots here

⬆ back to overview

Soil, Potting Mix …. your Grow Medium
Use the best Potting Mix
The better the potting mix, the easier your life. And the more you’ll harvest.

You can use pretty much any potting mix, as long as its good stuff.

Avoid mixes that are full of wood chips.

If you click this link, it will bring you to some soils that are available in your country.

There is also soil made especially for Cannabis, like Ocean Forest.

Then there is also the so-called ‘Super-Soil’. It’s supposed to have all the nutrients in it … so you don’t have to bother with giving nutrients.

Click here to see soil that works for Cannabis, available in your country.⤴

Click here to see Super Soil (USA Only) ⤴

⬆ back to overview

Buy a complete Cannabis Grow Box

New! Super Discreet, complete Mini Cannabis Grow Box available here. View

⬆ back to overview

Where to get Cannabis Seeds?
Now it’s getting interesting….


You could buy seeds online, or you could find seeds (in a green bag), or you could even breed seeds yourself.

Buy Cannabis Seeds Online
You can buy seeds online and they will get shipped to your door.

It’s a bit difficult to ship to your country DE, but there is a shop from California that does. They are called Beaver Seeds.

To make it discreet, the seeds are hidden inside random items such as T-Shirts, toys, etc.. That way they arrive safely at your door. You could read up on their shipping policy here.

Beaver Seeds has good reviews on Google and even a phone number:


Here is a coupon code that gives you 10% off: BVR10

Click here to visit Beaver Seeds.


Those 2 Seeds just fell out of that Bud
Healthy seeds have this beautiful tiger marble color. Dead seeds are hollow, white and soft.


Using seeds you found in a ‘Green Bag’.
If you ever bought weed and there were seeds in it …. you could’ve planted those. Free Seeds!


Bag seeds can work
But, the plants from those ‘bag seeds’ might not be as ‘genetically great’ as other bought seeds. That has to do with genetics (F1 Generation … too much to get into now).

⬆ back to overview

Germinate your Cannabis Seeds … and finally, start this Grow! 🙆‍♀️
You start by germinating your Marijuana Seeds. There are a 3 ways to do that:

A) Germinate Seeds in Soil directly
Earlier on this page, I talked about buying good quality potting mix. You could now fill your pots with that soil and stick 1 Cannabis seed into every pot. Just make a little hole into the soil (1/2 inch, 2cm deep) and let a seed fall in.


you can germinate seeds directly in soil, but its safer to use peat pellets
B) Germinate with peat pellets.
These Jiffy peat pellets are like a baby crib for seeds. They are soft and clean.

wet peat pellets
The germination success rate is highest this way. Underneath is a video on how to do it.


You can buy peat pellets here ⤴ (external link)

C) Germinating in Water or on Paper towel
With this method, the seeds are being soaked in water or palced on a wet paper towl.

After 2-4 days they will sprout.

When sprouted, you use tweezer and, very carefully, put them into their soil. It’s best to not touch the little tap root … after all this is a new born thing.


soaking seeds in water
⬆ back to overview

How many seeds should you Germinate?
There are male and female Cannabis plants. But only females grow buds.

So us home-growers, we only want females.

Normally, seeds turn out 50% male and 50% female. So you have to destroy the males. That means if 4 plants fit into your grow tent, you want ot germinate 8 seeds.

But, these days many seeds are feminized. that means they grow females only. So you don’t need to destroy males.

Buy feminized Cannabis Seeds here ⤴

⬆ back to overview

Transfer the youngsters into Pots

Transfer young Marijuana plants into pots
When the plant has popped out of the jiffy peat pellet, transfer it into a pot with fresh garden soil.

Fill up the pot with soil, make a deep hole in the middle and insert the whole jiffy peat pellet with the young plant.

Put it quite deep into that pot, bury half the stem for additional support. The buried stem will grow roots.

Gently and lightly compress the soil and slowly give a bit of water.


New! Super Discreet, complete Mini Cannabis Grow Box available here. View

⬆ back to overview

Germinated plants need to receive Light
Plant needs light now!


⬆ back to overview

Watering
Cannabis grows fast and drinks a lot of water.

Yet, overwatering can kill these plants very quickly.

Young plants need water approximately 1 x per week. Mature plants 1 x per day.

Watering Can
There is no set rule on watering. You need to give water when the soil getting dry. But don’t let it dry out completely, because then it becomes hard and new water has difficulties penetrating the soil…creating dry pockets that hurt your plant.

Touch the soil with the back of your fingers. Does it feel slightly cold-ish? It means there is enough water left. But if it feels warm you need to give water.

If your plants suddenly have their leaves hanging down, it probably means they are dangerously thirsty. Give water and the leaves go back to normal.

Excess water should be able to drain out of the pots. That is no problem with the above-mentioned air pots. Don’t leave your plants stand in water, they may drown.

Since more and more chemicals (chlorine, fluoride) are being added to our water supplies, it can be beneficial to use filtered water.

⬆ back to overview

Vegetative or Reprodutive
The Cannabis plant has 2 phases in life. Vegetative (growth) and reproductive (flowering).

During growth, the branches and leaves are built up. Then, in flowering, the plant creates buds on those branches.

So how do we know our plant is flowering?

There are 2 types of plants. Photo-flower plants and Auto-flower plants.

Photo-flowers will go into flowering when we put them into 12 hours light and 12 hours darkness. In a grow tent, you will change the light duration. Outside growers cannot really create such a schedule without difficulty. Outside, cannabis starts flowering when the days become shorter in the mid of summer.

Auto-flowering plants are a special breed that goes into flower automatically … after about 4 weeks of age. These plants can be left under 20hr light / 4 hrs darkness for their whole life.

Auto-Flowers are good for beginners. They tend to yield a harvest faster and are quite easy to grow. You can buy Auto-flower seeds here ↗.

Your plants are now germinated. You have put them into pots. They stand under your grow lights. Not too close to avoid the leaves getting burned.

Plants look something like this in week 4. time to make them flower!

3-4 Weeks old Marijuana Plants

New! Super Discreet, complete Mini Cannabis Grow Box available here. View

⬆ back to overview

The Reproductive (Flowering) Stage
After around 3.5 weeks, switch the light to 12 hours on / 12 hours off.

Now the plants will change from “vegetative’ (growth) phase to “flowering” phase. the plant now thinks it’s late summer and time to make seeds.

Do this with a few steps in between. E.g. a couple of days on 15 hours light on.

You will see the first buds after approximately 4 weeks of 12/12 hour light. Hurray! But now … you have to eliminate the males.

⬆ back to overview

How to spot a male plant
As mentioned earlier, only female plants ‘make buds’.

Unless you bought feminized seeds, there will be a few males that you have to remove. If you don’t remove them, they take up space and will pollinate the females. The females then make seeds and not that much bud.

This is a male:


4 weeks into flowering you’ll see first buds.

Both males and females have buds. They look differently.

Females are white hairs, males are hanging ‘balls’.

You must remove males once you have identified them. Because they will pollinate the females. And then the ladies won’t produce as much yield anymore.

Male and female Marijuana
⬆ back to overview

Cannabis Fertilizer
Marijuana Fertilizer
Veg n Bloom Fertilizer is good stuff
Cannabis is a hungry plant. It grows fast and needs lots of nutrients.

That means we need to feed it well to make it fat and juicy.

There are special marijuana fertilizers available. But even standard Tomato fertilizer would work.

Don’t give fertilizer right from the start …. let the plants age a bit. Perhaps 3 weeks old. Because they don’t need much food when they’re young and your soil already has some in it.

Fertilizer is mixed into the water. And then the plants are watered with that.

How much depends on the product you’re using. My favorite Cannabis fertilizer is Veg n Bloom. Because it is made by Cannabis growers who know a lot about chemistry.

You cannot give fertilizer directly, undiluted. That would kill the plant.

Always keep an eye on your plants. If the leafs aren’t nice, darkish green they may be hungry and need more food.

Healthy and sick Marijuana leaves
⬆ back to overview

Pest Problems, Bugs

Bugs do occur even indoors where there is seemingly no way for them to get into the box. Somehow they pop up anyway.

If you notice small white spots on your leaves have a good look at the underside.

You might see tiny bugs moving around slowly.

Often these are spider mites and they need treatment quickly. Or they’ll wrap up your plants in webs. And then … it’s a wrap.

Marijuana plant with pest
To combat these militants buy a mild pesticide. I recommend Neem Oil. It derived from plants. Remember your crop is grown for human consumption. You can’t use heavy poisons to treat it.

Mix the Neem oil with water as recommended on the bottle. Wait until the lights in your grow box turn off for the night. Then generously spray the whole plant top to bottom. Pay extra attention to the leave undersides. Make the plant drenching wet.

Let it dry until the lights turn back on. This should get rid of the pest. If not, you can repeat it during the next dark period.

Neem oil to treat Cannabis
⬆ back to overview

Are they Ripe yet?
It will take 2-3 month flowering time until they are ripe.

During this time, buds will grow. All you need to do is give water and fertilizer.

The next photo shows plants that were flowering for 2.5 month. They have nice buds but they aren’t ripe yet.

Nearly ready to harvest Cannabis plants
Almost ripe:
Almost ripe Cannabis plants
Ripe:
Your plants are ripe after 2 – 3 month of flowering.

You can tell they are ripe when most of those white hairs have turned brown.

Also ,the plant growth will have slowed down.

They will smell heavily and the buds will be compact and hard.

If you have a microscope you could check the trichomes (sticky, icy looking things covering the buds) for their color. If they look brownish its another indicator that the plant is ready to harvest.

Plants harvested very late tend to have a sleepy effect. Plants harvested early seem to have a more activating high.

Marijuana Bud closeup ready for harvest
⬆ back to overview

Harvest!
Harvesting is easy. Cut the whole plant just above the soil.

The hardest part is done.

You have grown the plant and there’s not much that can go wrong now.

Avoid touching the sticky buds. Anything stuck to your fingers is lost.

Marijuana Harvest time
Now a lot of work begins. Its time for …

⬆ back to overview

Trimming the buds
Use small scissors (nail scissors) to remove leaves from your buds.

Those big leaves can go into the bin. They have no active ingredients. Smoking them would just make you cough.

Then there are the smaller, icing-covered leaves in between the buds. Cut them (most of them) out but keep them.

They are smokeable. But they are even better used to make butter or hash.

Trimming Cannabis Buds
The cleaner you trim your buds, the better they’ll look. And the nicer they’ll be to smoke.

⬆ back to overview

Drying your precious harvest
Marijuana spread on paper for drying
Dry slowly, but not too slow.

For example, a good way to dry is spreading your buds on paper and leaving them in a dark room. They will dry slowly.

It is a bad idea to dry the material with a hair dryer or in an oven. It will taste like hay afterwards.

But if they dry too slowly, they might catch mould which quickly ruins them.

Drying them slowly will make them develop a pleasant smell and taste. Slow drying will also make them milder to smoke.

Your buds should feel dry after around 7 days. Then you put them into a large plastic bag over night (don’t compress).

On the next morning, they’ll feel moist again. Leave em dry for another 12 -24 hrs and put them back into the plastic bag.

Carefully slow down the drying process.

Slow drying in a plastic bag
At some point, the material is dry enough for the stems to snap upon bending. They should make a nice ‘crack’ sound.

This is the time to stop drying. You don’t want to make it 100% totally dry. Because some minor humidity is needed for the curing process.

You can now go ahead and smoke some. But it won’t have its full strength yet.

Dried Marijuana
⬆ back to overview


New! Super Discreet, complete Mini Cannabis Grow Box available here. View

Curing. Make good Buds even Better
Curing Marijuana
Freshly dried Marijuana can be consumed. It will have an effect.

However, it could be a lot better.

Over the next 2 – 4 month or so, chemical processes in the weed will decrease chlorophyll and increase THC + other active substances.

Meaning the stuff gets easier to consume and more potent in its effect.

Curing is done best in glass jars. Glass is neutral, plastic could leave its taste on the buds.

Put it into glass jars and store them in a dark place. Open the jars every few days to let in some oxygen.

This process is a bit like wine or cheese making. There are no fixed rules. Make your own.

⬆ back to overview

Finished!
Smoking Marijuana
This is how you grow your own at home.
